GANDHI'S LETTERS TO ADOLF HITLER (1939 AND 1940)
=================================================

Source: The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, vols. 70 and 73.
Reproduced from mkgandhi.org and the Gandhi Heritage Portal.

Note: Gandhi wrote two letters to Hitler — a short appeal on July 23,
1939, six weeks before the invasion of Poland, and a much longer letter
on December 24, 1940, after the war was well underway. Neither letter
is believed to have reached Hitler; both were likely intercepted by
British censors.

---

LETTER I — JULY 23, 1939

As at Wardha,
C.P.,
India,
July 23, 1939

DEAR FRIEND,

Friends have been urging me to write to you for the sake of humanity.
But I have resisted their request, because of the feeling that any
letter from me would be an impertinence. Something tells me that I must
not calculate and that I must make my appeal for whatever it may be
worth.

It is quite clear that you are today the one person in the world who
can prevent a war which may reduce humanity to the savage state. Must
you pay the price for an object however worthy it may appear to you to
be? Will you listen to the appeal of one who has deliberately shunned
the method of war not without considerable success? Any way I anticipate
your forgiveness, if I have erred in writing to you.

I remain,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI

Herr Hitler
Berlin
Germany

---

LETTER II — DECEMBER 24, 1940

Wardha,
December 24, 1940

DEAR FRIEND,

That I address you as a friend is no formality. I own no foes. My
business in life has been for the past 33 years to enlist the friendship
of the whole of humanity by befriending mankind, irrespective of race,
colour or creed.

I hope you will have the time and desire to know how a good portion of
humanity who have been living under the influence of that doctrine of
universal friendship view your action. We have no doubt about your
bravery or devotion to your fatherland, nor do we believe that you are
the monster described by your opponents. But your own writings and
pronouncements and those of your friends and admirers leave no room for
doubt that many of your acts are monstrous and unbecoming of human
dignity, especially in the estimation of men like me who believe in
universal friendliness. Such are your humiliation of Czechoslovakia, the
rape of Poland and the swallowing of Denmark. I am aware that your view
of life regards such spoliations as virtuous acts. But we have been
taught from childhood to regard them as acts degrading humanity. Hence
we cannot possibly wish success to your arms.

But ours is a unique position. We resist British Imperialism no less
than Nazism. If there is a difference, it is in degree. One-fifth of
the human race has been brought under the British heel by means that
will not bear scrutiny. Our resistance to it does not mean harm to the
British people. We seek to convert them, not to defeat them on the
battle-field. Ours is an unarmed revolt against the British rule. But
whether we convert them or not, we are determined to make their rule
impossible by non-violent non-co-operation. It is a method in its nature
indefensible. It is based on the knowledge that no spoliator can compass
his end without a certain degree of co-operation, willing or compulsory,
of the victim. Our rulers may have our land and bodies but not our
souls. They can have the former only by complete destruction of every
Indian — man, woman and child. That all may not rise to that degree of
heroism and that a fair amount of frightfulness can bend the back of
revolt is true but the argument would be beside the point. For, if a
fair number of men and women be found in India who would be prepared
without any ill will against the spoliators to lay down their lives
rather than bend the knee to them, they would have shown the way to
freedom from the tyranny of violence. I ask you to believe me when I say
that you will find an unexpected number of such men and women in India.
They have been having that training for the past 20 years.

We have been trying for the past half a century to throw off the British
rule. The movement of independence has been never so strong as now. The
most powerful political organization, I mean the Indian National
Congress, is trying to achieve this end. We have attained a very fair
measure of success through non-violent effort. We were groping for the
right means to combat the most organized violence in the world which the
British power represents. You have challenged it. It remains to be seen
which is the better organized, the German or the British. We know what
the British heel means for us and the non-European races of the world.
But we would never wish to end the British rule with German aid. We have
found in non-violence a force which, if organized, can without doubt
match itself against a combination of all the most violent forces in the
world. In non-violent technique, as I have said, there is no such thing
as defeat. It is all "do or die" without killing or hurting. It can be
used practically without money and obviously without the aid of science
of destruction which you have brought to such perfection. It is a marvel
to me that you do not see that it is nobody's monopoly. If not the
British, some other power will certainly improve upon your method and
beat you with your own weapon. You are leaving no legacy to your people
of which they would feel proud. They cannot take pride in a recital of
cruel deed, however skilfully planned.

I, therefore, appeal to you in the name of humanity to stop the war. You
will lose nothing by referring all the matters of dispute between you and
Great Britain to an international tribunal of your joint choice. If you
attain success in the war, it will not prove that you were in the right.
It will only prove that your power of destruction was greater. Whereas an
award by an impartial tribunal will show as far as it is humanly
possible which party was in the right.

You know that not long ago I made an appeal to every Briton to accept my
method of non-violent resistance. I did it because the British know me
as a friend though a rebel. I am a stranger to you and your people. I
have not the courage to make you the appeal I made to every Briton. Not
that it would not apply to you with the same force as to the British.
But my present proposal is much simple because much more practical and
familiar.

During this season when the hearts of the peoples of Europe yearn for
peace, we have suspended even our own peaceful struggle. Is it too much
to ask you to make an effort for peace during a time which may mean
nothing to you personally but which must mean much to the millions of
Europeans whose dumb cry for peace I hear, for my ears are attuned to
hearing the dumb millions? I had intended to address a joint appeal to
you and Signor Mussolini, whom I had the privilege of meeting when I was
in Rome during my visit to England as a delegate to the Round Table
Conference. I hope that he will take this as addressed to him also with
the necessary changes.

I am,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
