The 21 Demands of the Inter-Enterprise Strike Committee
(Gdansk Shipyard, 17 August 1980)

Presented by the Inter-Enterprise Strike Committee (Miedzy-zakladowy
Komitet Strajkowy, MKS), chaired by Lech Walesa, to the government
of the Polish People's Republic. Written on two plywood boards and
hung on the gate of the Lenin Shipyard in Gdansk on 18 August 1980.
The demands led to the Gdansk Agreement of 31 August 1980 and the
founding of Solidarity (Solidarnosc), the first independent trade
union in the Soviet bloc.

Inscribed on the UNESCO Memory of the World Register, 2003.

English translation from multiple sources cross-referenced:
- In Your Pocket Gdansk, "August Accords"
  https://www.inyourpocket.com/gdansk/august-accords-the-birth-of-solidarity_55800f
- Swarthmore College Global Nonviolent Action Database
  https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/polish-workers-general-strike-economic-rights-1980

---

1. Acceptance of free trade unions independent of the Communist Party
and of enterprises, in accordance with Convention No. 87 of the
International Labour Organization concerning the right to form free
trade unions, which was ratified by the Communist Government of Poland.

2. A guarantee of the right to strike and of the security of strikers
and those aiding them.

3. Compliance with the constitutional guarantee of freedom of speech,
the press and publication, including freedom for independent
publishers, and the availability of the mass media to representatives
of all faiths.

4. A return of former rights to: (a) people dismissed from work after
the 1970 and 1976 strikes, and (b) students expelled from school
because of their views. The release of all political prisoners,
among them Edmund Zadrozynski, Jan Kozlowski and Marek Kozlowski.
A halt in repression of the individual because of personal conviction.

5. Availability to the mass media of information about the formation
of the Inter-Enterprise Strike Committee and publication of its
demands.

6. The undertaking of actions aimed at bringing the country out of
its crisis situation by the following means: (a) making public
complete information about the social-economic situation, and
(b) enabling all sectors and social classes to take part in
discussion of the reform programme.

7. Compensation of all workers taking part in the strike for the
period of the strike, with vacation pay from the Central Council
of Trade Unions.

8. An increase in the base pay of each worker by 2,000 zloty a month
as compensation for the recent raise in prices.

9. Guaranteed automatic increases in pay on the basis of increases in
prices and the decline in real income.

10. A full supply of food products for the domestic market, with
exports limited to surpluses.

11. The abolition of "commercial" prices and of other sales for hard
currency in special shops.

12. The selection of management personnel on the basis of
qualifications, not party membership. Privileges of the secret police,
regular police and party apparatus are to be eliminated by equalizing
family subsidies, abolishing special stores, etc.

13. The introduction of food coupons for meat and meat products
(during the period in which control of the market situation is
regained).

14. Reduction in the age for retirement for women to 50 and for men
to 55, or after 30 years' employment in Poland for women and 35 years
for men, regardless of age.

15. Conformity of old-age pensions and annuities with what has
actually been paid in.

16. Improvements in the working conditions of the health service to
ensure full medical care for workers.

17. Assurances of a reasonable number of places in day-care centres
and kindergartens for the children of working mothers.

18. Paid maternity leave for three years.

19. A decrease in the waiting period for apartments.

20. An increase in the commuter's allowance to 100 zloty from 40,
with a supplemental benefit on separation.

21. A day of rest on Saturday. Workers in the brigade system or
round-the-clock jobs are to be compensated for the loss of free
Saturdays with an increased leave or other paid time off.
