J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER
Interview with Stephane Groueff, September 12, 1965
(From the Stephane Groueff Collection, Howard Gotlieb Archival
Research Center at Boston University)
Source: Nuclear Museum (ahf.nuclearmuseum.org)

Also includes: Oppenheimer's remarks from the 1965 NBC documentary
"The Decision to Drop the Bomb" (produced by Fred Freed, narrated by
Chet Huntley)
======================================================================

I. "NOW I AM BECOME DEATH" — FROM THE 1965 NBC DOCUMENTARY
----------------------------------------------------------------------

"We knew the world would not be the same. A few people laughed, a few
people cried, most people were silent. I remembered the line from the
Hindu scripture, the Bhagavad-Gita. Vishnu is trying to persuade the
Prince that he should do his duty and to impress him takes on his
multi-armed form and says, 'Now, I am become Death, the destroyer of
worlds.' I suppose we all thought that one way or another."

----------------------------------------------------------------------

II. FROM THE 1965 CBS NEWS INTERVIEW
----------------------------------------------------------------------

"The ending of the war by this means, certainly cruel, was not
undertaken lightly. But I am not, as of today, confident that a better
course was then open."

"I think when you play a meaningful part in bringing about the death
of over 100,000 people and the injury of a comparable number, you
naturally don't think of that with ease."

"I believe we had a great cause to do this, but I do not think that
our consciences should be entirely easy at stepping out of the part of
studying nature, learning the truth about it, to change the course of
human history."

"There are 100 reasons for seeing no hope at all... It's harder to
think of anything on the other side... they do exist and they look to
me like a bridgehead to a livable future, but not without work."

----------------------------------------------------------------------

III. INTERVIEW WITH STEPHANE GROUEFF, SEPTEMBER 12, 1965
(Full Transcript)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Stephane Groueff: I want to start from the beginning. My book, I
intend to start with the year 1942 because otherwise, there is no
limit. A few months before the Manhattan District and decision to go--

J. Robert Oppenheimer: The decision was actually made on December 6,
to take the thing seriously.

Groueff: '41?

Oppenheimer: Right.

Groueff: After Pearl Harbor?

Oppenheimer: Before Pearl Harbor.

Groueff: Before Pearl Harbor.

Oppenheimer: Well, of course, the initial discovery and its
interpretation in early 1939 attracted everybody's interest. I talked
in just a friendly way about the critical assemblies and things like
that. But I was not interested in fission. I had other professional
interests. And I was not brought into it until perhaps September of
'41 and then by an indiscretion -- an eminent English visitor started
talking to Lawrence and me.

Groueff: You were a professor at Berkeley?

Oppenheimer: That is right. And clearly, his source of his confidence
was the work of Peierls in England. And he said it was terrible that
Fermi and I were not involved in this.

Groueff: Who said that, the Englishman?

Oppenheimer: The Englishman. And this gave Lawrence the idea that I
should go with him to the academy and committee, which was considering
these problems. And in preparation for that, I began to look at it,
some reasonable ideas about the possible range of critical masses, the
use of the so-called tamper, probable assembly, and discuss them I
think in a conservative but affirmative way at that meeting.

Groueff: That was a meeting where?

Oppenheimer: In Schenectady, actually.

Groueff: So you came after this meeting with--?

Oppenheimer: After the discussion.

Groueff: After the discussion with Lawrence. Was that Oliphant?

Oppenheimer: You will have to provide the name because I will not.

Groueff: Okay.

Oppenheimer: And after that, I got interested. Lawrence had this
fantastic electromagnetic method that I went into some ways in
increasing its effectiveness by a very large factor, which did work
but it was just a question of how to design magnetic fields, really.
And after Pearl Harbor, there was a meeting setting up the
Metallurgical Laboratory and I attended that.

Groueff: That was in Chicago.

Oppenheimer: That was in Chicago, probably the second of January or
the 26th of December -- it was just after either Christmas or New
Year. You can find that out. And during the spring, I did have a
communication from Breit asking me if I would like to work with him.
But for reasons which are known but not clearly to me, Compton felt
that he should have at the Metallurgical Laboratory some group looking
into the actual problems of the bomb and not the reactor. And I think
he wanted Carl Anderson, a cosmic ray physicist from CalTech, to be in
charge of that but Anderson refused. The Project was in bad order, it
was thought that it was badly run, they would never get anywhere, and
that there were more useful things to do for the war.

I went to Chicago and Compton asked me to take charge of it and the
rest, I think, is recently recorded.

Groueff: So until you joined the Metallurgical Lab you were working
sort of part-time--?

Oppenheimer: In fact, I was not officially working at all.

Groueff: You were helping.

Oppenheimer: I met with people and I did one useful, not very
exciting, piece of work.

Groueff: You did not have a sort of definite task to finish like
Lawrence had or Compton or the other people?

Oppenheimer: No. Although I realized that there was a job to do, I did
not think it was mine or recognize that it was mine. But that changed
in the spring of '42 and I first found out what it was and saw that it
was suffering -- this is all history -- from terrible lack of
communication, misconceived ideas of secrecy, and from inadequate
theoretical guidance.

Groueff: So even then since the beginning, you worked on the problems
of critical mass and assembly?

Oppenheimer: Well, that started in the autumn of '41.

Groueff: Not so much in the separation.

Oppenheimer: No, except for some help to do the California project.

Oppenheimer: And I would say that from the time that fission was
discovered and we talked in a romantic way about what I call the
Mojave Experiment -- it turned out to be the wrong desert -- to the
time when we picked it up again in the autumn of 1941, I was thinking
about a wholly different question. And after that, it is well
recorded. I do not need to repeat.

Groueff: Do you remember the circumstances of your first meeting with
Groves?

Oppenheimer: Yes.

Groueff: I think he said it was on the train.

Oppenheimer: No, the first meeting with Groves was at the house of
the President of the University for California. It was called Sproul
and we had lunch there, I think. And after lunch, I said, "This thing
will never get on the rails unless there is a place where people can
talk to each other and work together on the problems of the bomb. And
this could be at Oak Ridge, it could be some California desert, but
someplace, there has got to be a place where people are free to
discuss what they know and what they do not know and to find out what
they can." And that made an impression on him.

The next time we met was in Chicago and he asked me to travel with
him -- probably Nichols.

Groueff: Marshall probably.

Oppenheimer: Marshall, yeah, on the 20th Century Limited. And I did
for a certain distance and at that time, we agreed that we would try
to set up a laboratory.

Groueff: But was it then that you were assigned with--?

Oppenheimer: I was assigned by Compton but it was a responsibility
without any means of doing anything about it.

Groueff: But the decision that you should have the whole project of
the assembling of the bomb and all this, the weapon side, was--?

Oppenheimer: That was probably somewhat later. My argument was not
that I should head it but that it should exist.

Groueff: I see.

Oppenheimer: Groves would know this better but there was probably a
long period of indecision about who the best person was to head it. I
know that my friend Ed McMillan was considered, who was then probably
not quite right for it. He is now the Director of the Lawrence
Laboratory. I think that after a certain amount of uncertainty and
vacillation, it was formally confirmed in the first days of 1943. But
all this is a record, I just do not have it.

A letter was sent by Groves and Conant to me establishing the
laboratory and me as its Director and it is published in--

Groueff: I saw this. But your selection, I think, was made probably
between Compton on one side and Groves--?

Oppenheimer: Well, in the nature of things, I am not an expert on it.

Groueff: And so from there?

Oppenheimer: Well, in '42 in the autumn, things were advanced enough
so that we actually started looking for a place. And McMillan and I
went off together with one of Groves' officers and Groves joined us
and he liked the Los Alamos site, which I showed him, and it was
certainly better than the one the officer had found. Whether it was
good or not, I do not know. So the work on the Los Alamos project
started in the autumn of '42 and I was involved in the design of
laboratories, houses. All the houses had balconies and fireplaces.

Groueff: That was your big contribution [laughing]?

Oppenheimer: That was my big contribution [laughing]. And I think the
actual confirmation of my responsibility may have come very early in
'43, I am not entirely sure, after an awful lot of discussion because
all the time I was recruiting people, and all the time I was
discovering the idea of going into uniform was completely unwelcome.

Groueff: At that time, it existed a little bit--?

Oppenheimer: Well, we actually moved into one of the teacher's houses
that had been there in the old school. The new houses were not yet
complete, the laboratory was not complete, but it was possible to
establish a headquarters.

Groueff: And you knew that the area -- you knew the boys' school there
before from your own childhood?

Oppenheimer: Well, no. Since '21, I think, I had been going to New
Mexico and since '29, we had a ranch in the Sangre de Cristo, which
we still have. It is about three thousand meters high. And it is
fifty-five miles by a very rough and terrible trail from there to Los
Alamos so we had ridden across it by horse. So I had been there but--

Groueff: And that helped in the selection of the site?

Oppenheimer: That made me know it existed, that about all. It was only
that the other site, which was deep in the canyon, had in fact, even
for our initial plans, inadequate room. It would have been completely
impossible to do the things which we had to do, as it turned out. But
also, my feeling was that if you are going to ask people to be
essentially confined, you must not put them in the bottom of a canyon.
You have to put them on the top of a mesa. I think that was even more
important than the technical details.

Groueff: So it turned out to be the good site, the ideal site for the
project.

Oppenheimer: Well, I cannot say that; it had many very bad
disadvantages. But it was not a place where you felt locked out
because you looked out over the whole valley.

Groueff: Very beautiful place, I loved it there.

Oppenheimer: And I will quote Emilio Segre, whom you may have talked
to, when he first came there in April of '43. He stood by this
building that is still there called Fuller Lodge, a sort of hotel. And
that time, there was nothing in front of it and you looked out over
the desert and to the Sangre de Cristo, which were covered with snow.
It was extremely beautiful. And Segre said, "We are going to get to
hate this view."

[...]

Groueff: What I want to emphasize in this book is the difficulties and
the obstacles in technical or scientific or technological areas and
how were they overcome. Now of course, in your part of the work, some
of the details are classified.

Oppenheimer: Yeah, I do not know what is classified. This makes it
difficult for me.

[...]

Oppenheimer: Well, I think the set of problems connected with
implosion was the most difficult and it required very new experimental
techniques. And it was not a branch of physics which anyone was very
familiar with.

Groueff: It did not exist before then?

Oppenheimer: No, no. And this was, both from a theoretical, from an
observational, and from a practical point of view, quite an adventure
and it was still a very reasonable opinion that one of the many things
that were needed to make it work was not completely in order on July
16. The doubts which then existed were not of a metaphysical quality.

[...]

Oppenheimer: And I would say that I think at the time, when the
laboratory had a sense of agonia was when we knew we had to do this
and did not know whether we could.

[...]

Groueff: How long did you continue to believe that the Germans were
working on the same thing?

Oppenheimer: Well, it is different from person to person. I think
probably Wigner believed it until there were no Germans left. I was
never quite as frantic about this. I think I understood a deep
destruction the National Socialist business had made in the German
scientific scene. I was more worried about the campaign in Africa and
the campaign in Russia when I went to New Mexico than I was about the
Germans making a bomb. I thought they might very well be winning the
war.

Groueff: By conventional weapons.

Oppenheimer: If you called it conventional.

[...]

Groueff: Now what is your opinion now that there is twenty years'
difference? My opinion being that this is probably one of the greatest
performances or achievements of this system.

Oppenheimer: Well, I am not the man to answer that question. I do not
know what it took to produce the hundred thousand airplanes that
Roosevelt asked for but it was certainly not trivial.

Groueff: But as far as a scientific or technological effort?

Oppenheimer: Well, it was certainly sui generis -- it was the first
thing of just that kind.

Groueff: We do not in history have many examples of such intense and
condensed in time.

Oppenheimer: No, it was certainly something novel.

Groueff: Enormous.

Oppenheimer: Novel.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Copyright 1965 Stephane Groueff. From the Stephane Groueff Collection,
Howard Gotlieb Archival Research Center at Boston University. Exclusive
rights granted to the Atomic Heritage Foundation.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

[NOTE: This transcript has been excerpted. The full interview covers
Oppenheimer's account of the Manhattan Project from his initial
involvement in 1941 through the establishment and operation of Los
Alamos. For the complete transcript, see the Nuclear Museum at
ahf.nuclearmuseum.org/voices/oral-histories/j-robert-oppenheimers-interview/]
