LEONHARD EULER
Selected Letters from "Letters to a German Princess,
on Different Subjects in Physics and Philosophy" (1768)
Translated from the French by Henry Hunter, D.D. (1795)
Source: MacTutor History of Mathematics, University of St Andrews
(mathshistory.st-andrews.ac.uk/Extras/Euler_letters/)
======================================================================

[NOTE: Euler wrote 234 letters to Princess Friederike Charlotte of
Brandenburg-Schwedt between 1760 and 1762. When he began writing,
Euler was 53 years old and the Director of the Mathematics Section
of the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin. The Princess was
fifteen. The letters were first published in three volumes (St
Petersburg, 1768 and Frankfurt, 1774). What follows are three
representative letters from the collection.]

----------------------------------------------------------------------
LETTER I: OF MAGNITUDE, OR EXTENSION
Berlin, 19 April 1760
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The hope of having the honour to communicate in person to your
highness my lessons in geometry becoming more and more distant, which
is a very sensible mortification to me, I feel myself impelled to
supply person instruction by writing, as far as the nature of the
subjects will permit.

I begin my attempt by assisting you to form a just idea of Magnitude;
producing, as examples, the smallest as well as the greatest
extensions of matter actually discoverable in the system of the
universe. And, first, it is necessary to fix on some one determinate
division of measure, obvious to the senses, and of which we have an
exact idea, that of a foot, for instance. The quantity of this, once
established, and rendered familiar to the eye, will enable us to form
the idea of every other quantity, as to length, great or small; the
former, by ascertaining how many feet it contains; and the latter, by
ascertaining what part of a foot measures it. For, having the idea of
a foot, we have that also of it's half, of it's quarter, of it's
twelfth part, denominated an inch, of its hundredth, and of its
thousandth part, which is so small as almost to escape sight. But it
is to be remarked that there are animals, not of greater extension
than this last subdivision of a foot, which, however, are composed of
members through which the blood circulates, and which again contain
other animals, as diminutive compared to them, as they are compared to
us. Hence it may be concluded that animals exist, whose smallness
eludes the imagination; and that these again are divisible into parts
inconceivably smaller. Thus, for example, though the ten thousandth
part of a foot be too small for sight, and, compared to us, ceases to
be an object of sense, it nevertheless surpasses in magnitude certain
complete animals; and must, to one of those animals, were it endowed
with the power of perception, appear extremely great.

Let us now make the transition from these minute quantities, in
pursuing which the mind is lost, to those of the greatest magnitude.
You have the idea of a mile; the distance from hence to Magdeburg is
computed to be 18 miles; a mile contains 24,000 feet, and we employ
it in measuring the distance of the different regions of the globe, in
order to avoid numbers inconceivably great, in our calculations, which
must be the case if we used foot instead of mile. A mile then,
containing 24,000 feet, when it is said that Magdeburg is 18 miles
from Berlin, the idea is much clearer, than if the distance of these
two cities were said to be 432,000 feet: a number so great almost
overwhelms the understanding. Again, we have a tolerably just idea of
the magnitude of the earth, when we are told that this circumference
is about 5,400 miles. And the diameter being a straight line passing
through the centre, and terminating in opposite directions, in the
surface of the sphere, which is the acknowledged figure of the Earth,
for which reason also we give it the name of globe -- the diameter of
this globe is calculated to be 1,720 miles; and this is the
measurement which we employ for determining the greatest distances
discoverable in the heavens. Of all the heavenly bodies the Moon is
nearest to us, being distant only about 30 diameters of the earth,
which amount to 51,600 miles, or 1,238,400,000 feet; but the first
computation of 30 diameters of the earth is the clearest idea. The
Sun is about 300 times farther from us than the moon, and when we say
his distance is 9,000 diameters of the earth, we have a much clearer
idea than if it were expressed in miles or in feet.

You know that the earth performs a revolution round the sun in the
space of a year, but that the sun remains fixed. Beside the earth,
there are five other similar bodies, named planets, which revolve
round the sun; two of them at smaller distances, Mercury and Venus,
and three at greater, namely Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. All the other
stars which we see, comets excepted, are called fixed; and their
distance from us is incomparably greater than that of the sun. Their
distances are undoubtedly very unequal, which is the reason that some
of these bodies appear greater than others. But the nearest of them
is, unquestionably, above 5,000 times more distant than the sun: its
distance from us, accordingly, exceeds 45,000,000 diameters of the
earth, that is 77,400,000,000 miles, and this again, multiplied by
24,000, will give that prodigious distance in feet. And this, after
all, is the distance only of those fixed stars which are the nearest
to us; the most remote which we see are perhaps a hundred times
farther off. It is probable, at the same time, that these stars taken
together, constitute only a very small part of the whole universe,
relatively to which these prodigious distances are not greater than a
grain of sand compared with the earth. This immensity is the work of
the Almighty, who governs the greatest bodies and the smallest.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
LETTER II: OF VELOCITY
22 April 1760
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Flattering myself that your Highness may be pleased to accept the
continuation of my instructions, a specimen of which I took the
liberty of presenting to you in a former letter, I proceed to unfold
the idea of velocity, which is a particular species of extension, and
susceptible of increase and of diminution. When any substance is
transported, that is, when it passes from one place to another, we
ascribe to it a velocity. Let two persons, the one on horseback, the
other on foot, proceed from Berlin to Magdeburg, we have, in both
cases, the idea of a certain velocity; but it will be immediately
affirmed, that the velocity of the former exceeds that of the latter.

The question, then, is: Wherein consists the difference which we
observe between these several degrees of velocity? The road is the
same to him who rides and, to him who walks: but the difference
evidently lies in the time which each employs in performing the same
course. The velocity of the horseman is the greater of the two, as he
employs less time on the road from Berlin to Magdeburg; and the
velocity of the other is less, because he employs more time in
travelling the same distance. Hence it is clear, that in order to
form an accurate idea of velocity, we must attend at once to two kinds
of quantity: namely to the length of the road, and to the time
employed. A body, therefore, which in the same time passes through
double the space which another body does, has double its velocity; if,
in the same time, it passes through thrice the distance, it is said to
have thrice the velocity, and so on. We shall comprehend, then, the
velocity of a body, when we are informed of the space through which it
passes in a certain quantity of time.

In order to know the velocity of my pace, when I walk to Lytzow, I
have observed that I make 120 steps in a minute, and one of my steps
is equal to two feet and a half. My velocity then, is such, as to
carry me 300 feet in a minute, and a space sixty times greater, or
18,000 feet in an hour, which however does not amount to a mile, for
this, being 24,000 feet, would require an hour and 20 minutes. Were
I, therefore, to walk from hence to Magdeburg, it would take exactly
24 hours. This conveys an accurate idea of the velocity with which I
am able to walk. Now it is easy to comprehend what is meant by a
greater or less velocity. For if a courier were to go from hence to
Magdeburg in 12 hours, his velocity would be the double of mine; if
he went in eight hours, his velocity would be triple. We remark a
very great difference in the degrees of velocity. The tortoise
furnishes an example of a velocity extremely small. If she advances
only one foot in a minute, her velocity is 300 times less than mine,
for I advance 300 feet in the same time. We are likewise acquainted
with velocities much greater. That of the wind admits of great
variation. A moderate wind goes at the rate of 10 feet in a second, or
600 feet in a minute; its velocity therefore is the double of mine. A
wind that runs 20 feet in a second, or 1200 in a minute, is rather
strong; and a wind which flies at the rate of 50 feet in a second is
extremely violent, though its velocity is only ten times greater than
mine, and would take two hours and twenty-four minutes to blow from
hence to Magdeburg.

The velocity of sound comes next, which moves 1000 feet in a second,
and 60,000 in a minute. This velocity therefore, is 200 times greater
than that of my pace; and were a cannon to be fired at Magdeburg, if
the report could be heard at Berlin, it would arrive there in seven
minutes. A cannon-ball moves with nearly the same velocity; but when
the piece is loaded to the utmost, the ball is supposed capable of
flying 2,000 feet in a second, or 120,000 in a minute. This velocity
appears prodigious, though it is only 400 times greater than that of
my pace in walking to Lytzow; it is at the same time the greatest
velocity known upon earth. But there are in the heavens velocities far
greater, though their motion appears to be extremely deliberate. You
know that the earth turns round on its axis in 24 hours: every point
of it's surface, then, under the equator, moves 5,400 miles in 24
hours, while I am able to get through only 18 miles. Its velocity is
accordingly above 300 times greater than mine, and less notwithstanding
than the greatest possible velocity of a cannon-ball. The earth
performs its revolution round the sun in the space of a year,
proceeding at the rate of 128,250 miles in 24 hours. Its velocity,
therefore, is 18 times more rapid than that of a cannon ball. The
greatest velocity of which we have any knowledge is, undoubtedly, that
of light, which moves 2,000,000 of miles every minute, and exceeds
the velocity of a cannon ball 4,000,000 times.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
LETTER III: OF THE PLEASURE DERIVED FROM FINE MUSIC
6 May 1760
----------------------------------------------------------------------

It is a question as important as curious, whence is it that a fine
piece of music excites a sentiment of pleasure? The learned differ on
this subject. Some pretend that it is mere caprice, and that the
pleasure produced by music is not founded on reason, because what is
grateful to one is disgusting to another. Far from deciding the
question, this renders it only more complicated. The very point to be
determined is, how comes it that the same piece of music produces
effects so different, since all admit that nothing happens without
reason? Others maintain that the pleasure derived from fine music
consists in the perception of the order which pervades it.

This opinion appears at first sight sufficiently well founded, and
merits a more attentive examination. Music presents objects of two
kinds, in which order is essential. The one relates to the difference
of the sharp or flat tones; and you will recollect, that it consists
in the number of vibrations performed by each note in the same time.
This difference, which is perceptible between the quickness of the
vibrations of all sounds, is what is properly called harmony. The
effect of a piece of music, of which we feel the relations of the
vibrations of all the notes that compose it, is the production of
harmony. Thus, two notes which differ an octave excite a perception of
1 to 2; a fifth, of that of 2 to 3; and a greater third, of that of
4 to 5.

We comprehend, then, the order which is found in harmony, when we
know all the relations which pervade the notes of which it is
composed; and it is the perception of the ear which leads to this
knowledge. This perception, more or less delicate, determines why the
same harmony is felt by one, and not at all by another, especially
when the relations of the notes are expressed by somewhat greater
numbers. Music contains, besides harmony, another object equally
susceptible of order, namely, the measure, by which we assign to every
note a certain duration; and the perception of the measure consists in
the knowledge of this duration, and of the relations which result from
it.

The drum and tymbal furnish the example of a music in which measure
alone takes place, as all the notes are equal among themselves, and
then there is no harmony. There is likewise a music consisting wholly
in harmony, to the exclusion of measure. This music is the choral, in
which all the notes are of the same duration; but perfect music unites
harmony and measure. Thus the connoisseur who hears a piece of music,
and who comprehends, by the acute perception of his ear, all the
proportions on which both the harmony and the measure are founded, has
certainly the most perfect knowledge possible of that music: while
another, who perceives these proportions only in part, or not at all,
understands nothing of the matter, or possesses at most a very slender
knowledge of it. But the sentiment of pleasure excited by fine music,
must not be confounded with the knowledge of which I have been
speaking, though it may be confidently affirmed, that a piece of music
cannot produce any, unless the relations of it are perceived. For this
knowledge alone is not sufficient to excite the sentiment of pleasure;
something more is wanting, which no one hitherto has unfolded.

In order to be convinced that the perception alone of all the
proportions of a piece of music is insufficient to produce pleasure,
you have only to consider music of a very simple construction, such as
goes in octaves alone, in which the perception of proportions is
undoubtedly the easiest. Such music would be far from conveying
pleasure, though you might have the most perfect knowledge of it. It
will be said then that pleasure requires a knowledge not quite so
easily attained, a knowledge that occasions some trouble; which must,
if I may use the expression, cost us something. But, in my opinion,
neither is this a satisfactory solution. A dissonance, the relations
of which are expressed by the highest numbers, is caught with more
difficulty; a series of dissonances, however, following without choice,
and without design, cannot please. The composer must therefore have
pursued, in his work, a certain plan, executed in real and perceptible
proportions.

Then a connoisseur on hearing such a piece, and comprehending, beside
the proportions, the very plan and design which the composer had in
view, will feel that satisfaction which constitutes the pleasure
procured by exquisite music to an ear accustomed to relish the
beauties and delicacies of that enchanting art. It arises, then, from
divining in some measure the views and feelings of the composer, whose
execution, when fortunate, fills the soul with an agreeable sensation.
It is a satisfaction somewhat similar to that which is derived from the
sight of a well-acted pantomime, in which you may conjecture, by the
gesture and action, the sentiments and dialogue intended to be
expressed, and which presents, besides, a well-digested plan. The
enigma of the chimney-sweeper, which was so diverting to your
highness, furnishes me with another excellent comparison. When you can
guess the sense, and discover that it is perfectly expressed in the
proposition of the enigma, you feel a very sensible pleasure on making
the discovery; but insipid and incongruous enigmas produce none. Such
are, if I may be permitted to judge, the true principles on which
decisions respecting the excellency of musical compositions are
founded.
