THUCYDIDES ON THE PLAGUE OF ATHENS (430 BCE)
The History of the Peloponnesian War, Book 2, Chapters 47-54
Translated by Richard Crawley (1874)
Source: Project Gutenberg, public domain

---

Such was the funeral that took place during this winter, with which the
first year of the war came to an end. In the first days of summer the
Lacedaemonians and their allies, with two-thirds of their forces as
before, invaded Attica, under the command of Archidamus, son of
Zeuxidamus, King of Lacedaemon, and sat down and laid waste the
country. Not many days after their arrival in Attica the plague first
began to show itself among the Athenians. It was said that it had
broken out in many places previously in the neighbourhood of Lemnos and
elsewhere; but a pestilence of such extent and mortality was nowhere
remembered. Neither were the physicians at first of any service,
ignorant as they were of the proper way to treat it, but they died
themselves the most thickly, as they visited the sick most often; nor
did any human art succeed any better. Supplications in the temples,
divinations, and so forth were found equally futile, till the
overwhelming nature of the disaster at last put a stop to them
altogether.

It first began, it is said, in the parts of Ethiopia above Egypt, and
thence descended into Egypt and Libya and into most of the King's
country. Suddenly falling upon Athens, it first attacked the population
in Piraeus -- which was the occasion of their saying that the
Peloponnesians had poisoned the reservoirs, there being as yet no wells
there -- and afterwards appeared in the upper city, when the deaths became
much more frequent. All speculation as to its origin and its causes, if
causes can be found adequate to produce so great a disturbance, I leave
to other writers, whether lay or professional; for myself, I shall
simply set down its nature, and explain the symptoms by which perhaps
it may be recognized by the student, if it should ever break out again.
This I can the better do, as I had the disease myself, and watched its
operation in the case of others.

That year then is admitted to have been otherwise unprecedentedly free
from sickness; and such few cases as occurred all determined in this.
As a rule, however, there was no ostensible cause; but people in good
health were all of a sudden attacked by violent heats in the head, and
redness and inflammation in the eyes, the inward parts, such as the
throat or tongue, becoming bloody and emitting an unnatural and fetid
breath. These symptoms were followed by sneezing and hoarseness, after
which the pain soon reached the chest, and produced a hard cough. When
it fixed in the stomach, it upset it; and discharges of bile of every
kind named by physicians ensued, accompanied by very great distress. In
most cases also an ineffectual retching followed, producing violent
spasms, which in some cases ceased soon after, in others much later.
Externally the body was not very hot to the touch, nor pale in its
appearance, but reddish, livid, and breaking out into small pustules
and ulcers. But internally it burned so that the patient could not bear
to have on him clothing or linen even of the very lightest description;
or indeed to be otherwise than stark naked. What they would have liked
best would have been to throw themselves into cold water; as indeed was
done by some of the neglected sick, who plunged into the rain-tanks in
their agonies of unquenchable thirst; though it made no difference
whether they drank little or much. Besides this, the miserable feeling
of not being able to rest or sleep never ceased to torment them. The
body meanwhile did not waste away so long as the distemper was at its
height, but held out to a marvel against its ravages; so that when they
succumbed, as in most cases, on the seventh or eighth day to the
internal inflammation, they had still some strength in them. But if
they passed this stage, and the disease descended further into the
bowels, inducing a violent ulceration there accompanied by severe
diarrhoea, this brought on a weakness which was generally fatal. For
the disorder first settled in the head, ran its course from thence
through the whole of the body, and, even where it did not prove mortal,
it still left its mark on the extremities; for it settled in the privy
parts, the fingers and the toes, and many escaped with the loss of
these, some too with that of their eyes. Others again were seized with
an entire loss of memory on their first recovery, and did not know
either themselves or their friends.

But while the nature of the distemper was such as to baffle all
description, and its attacks almost too grievous for human nature to
endure, it was still in the following circumstance that its difference
from all ordinary disorders was most clearly shown. All the birds and
beasts that prey upon human bodies, either abstained from touching them
(though there were many lying unburied), or died after tasting them. In
proof of this, it was noticed that birds of this kind actually
disappeared; they were not about the bodies, or indeed to be seen at
all. But of course the effects which I have mentioned could best be
studied in a domestic animal like the dog.

Such then, if we pass over the varieties of particular cases which were
many and peculiar, were the general features of the distemper.
Meanwhile the town enjoyed an immunity from all the ordinary disorders;
or if any case occurred, it ended in this. Some died in neglect, others
in the midst of every attention. No remedy was found that could be used
as a specific; for what did good in one case, did harm in another.
Strong and weak constitutions proved equally incapable of resistance,
all alike being swept away, although dieted with the utmost precaution.
By far the most terrible feature in the malady was the dejection which
ensued when any one felt himself sickening, for the despair into which
they instantly fell took away their power of resistance, and left them
a much easier prey to the disorder; besides which, there was the awful
spectacle of men dying like sheep, through having caught the infection
in nursing each other. This caused the greatest mortality. On the one
hand, if they were afraid to visit each other, they perished from
neglect; indeed many houses were emptied of their inmates for want of a
nurse: on the other, if they ventured to do so, death was the
consequence. This was especially the case with such as made any
pretensions to goodness: honour made them unsparing of themselves in
their attendance in their friends' houses, where even the members of
the family were at last worn out by the moans of the dying, and
succumbed to the force of the disaster. Yet it was with those who had
recovered from the disease that the sick and the dying found most
compassion. These knew what it was from experience, and had now no fear
for themselves; for the same man was never attacked twice -- never at
least fatally. And such persons not only received the congratulations
of others, but themselves also, in the elation of the moment, half
entertained the vain hope that they were for the future safe from any
disease whatsoever.

An aggravation of the existing calamity was the influx from the country
into the city, and this was especially felt by the new arrivals. As
there were no houses to receive them, they had to be lodged at the hot
season of the year in stifling cabins, where the mortality raged
without restraint. The bodies of dying men lay one upon another, and
half-dead creatures reeled about the streets and gathered round all the
fountains in their longing for water. The sacred places also in which
they had quartered themselves were full of corpses of persons that had
died there, just as they were; for as the disaster passed all bounds,
men, not knowing what was to become of them, became utterly careless of
everything, whether sacred or profane. All the burial rites before in
use were entirely upset, and they buried the bodies as best they could.
Many from want of the proper appliances, through so many of their
friends having died already, had recourse to the most shameless
sepultures: sometimes getting the start of those who had raised a pile,
they threw their own dead body upon the stranger's pyre and ignited it;
sometimes they tossed the corpse which they were carrying on the top of
another that was burning, and so went off.

Nor was this the only form of lawless extravagance which owed its
origin to the plague. Men now coolly ventured on what they had formerly
done in a corner, and not just as they pleased, seeing the rapid
transitions produced by persons in prosperity suddenly dying and those
who before had nothing succeeding to their property. So they resolved
to spend quickly and enjoy themselves, regarding their lives and riches
as alike things of a day. Perseverance in what men called honour was
popular with none, it was so uncertain whether they would be spared to
attain the object; but it was settled that present enjoyment, and all
that contributed to it, was both honourable and useful. Fear of gods or
law of man there was none to restrain them. As for the first, they
judged it to be just the same whether they worshipped them or not, as
they saw all alike perishing; and for the last, no one expected to live
to be brought to trial for his offences, but each felt that a far
severer sentence had been already passed upon them all and hung ever
over their heads, and before this fell it was only reasonable to enjoy
life a little.

Such was the nature of the calamity, and heavily did it weigh on the
Athenians; death raging within the city and devastation without. Among
other things which they remembered in their distress was, very
naturally, the following verse which the old men said had long ago been
uttered:

  A Dorian war shall come and with it death.

So a dispute arose as to whether dearth and not death had not been the
word in the verse; but at the present juncture, it was of course
decided in favour of the latter; for the people made their recollection
fit in with their sufferings. I fancy, however, that if another Dorian
war should ever afterwards come upon us, and a dearth should happen to
accompany it, the verse will probably be read accordingly. The oracle
also which had been given to the Lacedaemonians was now remembered by
those who knew of it. When the god was asked whether they should go to
war, he answered that if they put their might into it, victory would be
theirs, and that he would himself be with them. With this oracle events
were supposed to tally. For the plague broke out as soon as the
Peloponnesians invaded Attica, and never entering Peloponnese (not at
least to an extent worth noticing), committed its worst ravages at
Athens, and next to Athens, at the most populous of the other towns.
Such was the history of the plague.
