AZTEC ACCOUNTS OF THE SPANISH CONQUEST
From the Florentine Codex, Book 12 (compiled 1550s)
By Fray Bernardino de Sahagun's Nahua informants
English translations by James Lockhart and from
"The Broken Spears" ed. Miguel Leon-Portilla (Beacon Press, 1962)
Sources: Early Nahuatl Library (enl.wired-humanities.org);
The American Yawp Reader (americanyawp.com)

---

CHAPTER 1: THE OMENS (from the Lockhart translation)

[Before the Spaniards arrived, eight omens appeared in Mexico.]

The first omen was a flame or tongue of fire, like the light of dawn,
that appeared in the sky for a year, visible after midnight and
vanishing at sunrise.

The seventh omen: hunters caught an ash-colored bird with a mirror on
its head. When Moteuccoma looked into this mirror, he saw a multitude
of people coming along, coming bunched, outfitted for war, carried
on the backs of deer.

The eighth omen: monstrous beings appeared multiple times, who
vanished after Moteuccoma saw them.

---

CHAPTER 12: THE MEETING WITH THE SPANIARDS (from the Lockhart translation)

Moteuccoma sent noble emissaries, led by Tzihuacpopocatzin, to
meet Cortes between two volcanoes. They presented gold gifts to the
Spaniards, who "seemed to smile, to rejoice and be very happy. Like
monkeys they grabbed the gold."

When the Spaniards questioned whether Tzihuacpopocatzin was actually
Moteuccoma, he initially claimed to be. The Spaniards rejected this,
stating: "You can't lie to us, you can't fool us" and declaring they
would see Moteuccoma directly.

---

MONTEZUMA'S GREETING TO CORTES (from The Broken Spears)

When Montezuma had given necklaces to each one, Cortes asked him:
"Are you Montezuma? Are you the king? Is it true that you are the
king Montezuma?"

And the king said: "Yes, I am Montezuma." Then he stood up to
welcome Cortes; he came forward, bowed his head low and addressed
him in these words: "Our lord, you are weary. The journey has tired
you, but now you have arrived on the earth. You have come to your
city, Mexico. You have come here to sit on your throne, to sit
under its canopy.

"The kings who have gone before, your representatives, guarded it
and preserved it for your coming. The kings Itzcoatl, Montezuma the
Elder, Axayacatl, Tizoc and Ahuitzol ruled for you in the City of
Mexico. The people were protected by their swords and sheltered by
their shields.

"Do the kings know the destiny of those they left behind, their
posterity? If only they are watching! If only they can see what I see!

No, it is not a dream. I am not walking in my sleep. I am not seeing
you in my dreams.... I have seen you at last! I have met you face to
face! I was in agony for five days, for ten days, with my eyes fixed
on the Region of the Mystery. And now you have come out of the clouds
and mists to sit on your throne again.

This was foretold by the kings who governed your city, and now it has
taken place. You have come back to us; you have come down from the
sky. Rest now, and take possession of your royal houses. Welcome to
your land, my lords!"

When Montezuma had finished, La Malinche translated his address into
Spanish so that the Captain could understand it. Cortes replied in
his strange and savage tongue, speaking first to La Malinche: "Tell
Montezuma that we are his friends. There is nothing to fear. We have
wanted to see him for a long time, and now we have seen his face and
heard his words. Tell him that we love him well and that our hearts
are contented."

Then he said to Montezuma: "We have come to your house in Mexico as
friends. There is nothing to fear."

La Malinche translated this speech and the Spaniards grasped
Montezuma's hands and patted his back to show their affection for him.

---

CHAPTER 20: THE MASSACRE IN THE TEMPLE (Lockhart translation)

Twentieth chapter, where it is said how the Spaniards killed and
annihilated the Mexica who were celebrating the feast of
Huitzilopochtli at what they call the Teoithualco [Divine Courtyard].

When things were already going on, when the festivity was being
observed and there was dancing and singing, with voices raised in
song, the singing was like the noise of waves breaking against the
rocks.

When it was time, when the moment had come for the Spaniards to do
the killing, they came out equipped for battle. They came and closed
off each of the places where people went in and out. And when they
had closed these exits, they stationed themselves in each, and no
one could come out any more.

When this had been done, they went into the temple courtyard to kill
people. Those whose assignment it was to do the killing just went on
foot, each with his metal sword and his leather shield, some of them
iron-studded. Then they surrounded those who were dancing, going
among the cylindrical drums. They struck a drummer's arms; both of
his hands were severed. Then they struck his neck; his head landed
far away. Then they stabbed everyone with iron lances and struck them
with iron swords. They stuck some in the belly, and then their
entrails came spilling out. They split open the heads of some, they
really cut their skulls to pieces, their skulls were cut up into
little bits. And some they hit on the shoulders; their bodies broke
open and ripped. Some they hacked on the calves, some on the thighs,
some on their bellies, and then all their entrails would spill out.
And if someone still tried to run it was useless; he just dragged his
intestines along. There was a stench as if of sulfur. Those who tried
to escape could go nowhere. When anyone tried to go out, at the
entryways they struck and stabbed him.

But some climbed up the wall and were able to escape. Some went into
the various calpolli temples and took refuge there. Some took refuge
among, entered among those who had really died, feigning death, and
they were able to escape. But if someone took a breath and they saw
him, they stabbed him.

The blood of the warriors ran like water; the ground was almost
slippery with blood, and the stench of it rose, and the entrails
were lying dragged out.

And the Spaniards went everywhere searching in the calpolli temples,
stabbing and searching in case someone was taking shelter there.

And when it became known, everyone cried out, "Mexica warriors, come
running, get outfitted with devices, shields, and arrows, hurry,
come running, the warriors are dying; they have died, perished, been
annihilated, oh Mexica warriors!" Thereupon there were war cries,
shouting, and beating of hands against lips. The warriors quickly
came outfitted, bunched together, carrying arrows and shields. Then
the fighting began; they shot at them with barbed darts, spears, and
tridents, and they hurled darts with broad obsidian points at them.
A cloud of yellow reeds spread over the Spaniards.

---

THE BROKEN SPEARS (from The Broken Spears / American Yawp Reader)

During this time, The Sun [Cortes] commanded that Montezuma and
Itzcohuatzin, the military chief of Tlatelolco, be made prisoners.
The Spaniards hanged a chief from Acolhuacan named Nezahualquentzin.
They also murdered the king of Nauhtla, Cohualpopocatzin, by wounding
him with arrows and then burning him alive.

The Spaniards attacked the musicians first, slashing at their hands
and faces until they had killed all of them. The singers -- and even
the spectators -- were also killed. This slaughter in the Sacred Patio
went on for three hours. Then the Spaniards burst into the rooms of
the temple to kill the others: those who were carrying water, or
bringing fodder for the horses, or grinding meal, or sweeping, or
standing watch over this work.

The king Montezuma, who was accompanied by Itzcohuatzin and by those
who had brought food for the Spaniards, protested: "Our lords, that
is enough! What are you doing? These people are not carrying shields
or macanas. Our lords, they are completely unarmed!"

The Sun had treacherously murdered our people on the twentieth day
after the captain left for the coast. We allowed the Captain to
return to the city in peace. But on the following day we attacked him
with all our might, and that was the beginning of the war.

---

CHAPTER 29: THE SMALLPOX (Lockhart translation)

After the Spaniards departed Mexico, a great plague struck. Large
bumps spread on people; some were entirely covered. A great many died
of it. Very many people died of them, and many just starved to death;
starvation reigned, and no one took care of others any longer.

Some people's faces were spoiled by it, with rough skin, and some
lost an eye or were blinded.

The illness lasted a full sixty days before abating.
