OLAUDAH EQUIANO, "THE INTERESTING NARRATIVE" (1789)
Chapter II: The Middle Passage
Source: Project Gutenberg (EBook #15399)

Olaudah Equiano (c. 1745-1797) was an Igbo man from what is now southeastern
Nigeria who was kidnapped into slavery at age eleven. His autobiography, published
in 1789, became one of the most influential texts of the abolitionist movement.
Chapter II describes his kidnapping, journey to the coast, first sight of a slave
ship, the horrific conditions of the Middle Passage across the Atlantic, and
arrival in Barbados where enslaved people were sold at auction.

==========================================================================

seven months after I had been kidnapped, I arrived at the sea coast.
It would be tedious and uninteresting to relate all the incidents
which befell me during this journey, and which I have not yet
forgotten; of the various hands I passed through, and the manners and
customs of all the different people among whom I lived: I shall
therefore only observe, that in all the places where I was the soil
was exceedingly rich; the pomkins, eadas, plantains, yams, &c. &c.
were in great abundance, and of incredible size. There were also vast
quantities of different gums, though not used for any purpose; and
every where a great deal of tobacco. The cotton even grew quite wild;
and there was plenty of redwood. I saw no mechanics whatever in all
the way, except such as I have mentioned. The chief employment in all
these countries was agriculture, and both the males and females, as
with us, were brought up to it, and trained in the arts of war.

The first object which saluted my eyes when I arrived on the coast was
the sea, and a slave ship, which was then riding at anchor, and
waiting for its cargo. These filled me with astonishment, which was
soon converted into terror when I was carried on board. I was
immediately handled and tossed up to see if I were sound by some of
the crew; and I was now persuaded that I had gotten into a world of
bad spirits, and that they were going to kill me. Their complexions
too differing so much from ours, their long hair, and the language
they spoke, (which was very different from any I had ever heard)
united to confirm me in this belief. Indeed such were the horrors of
my views and fears at the moment, that, if ten thousand worlds had
been my own, I would have freely parted with them all to have
exchanged my condition with that of the meanest slave in my own
country. When I looked round the ship too and saw a large furnace or
copper boiling, and a multitude of black people of every description
chained together, every one of their countenances expressing dejection
and sorrow, I no longer doubted of my fate; and, quite overpowered
with horror and anguish, I fell motionless on the deck and fainted.
When I recovered a little I found some black people about me, who I
believed were some of those who brought me on board, and had been
receiving their pay; they talked to me in order to cheer me, but all
in vain. I asked them if we were not to be eaten by those white men
with horrible looks, red faces, and loose hair. They told me I was
not; and one of the crew brought me a small portion of spirituous
liquor in a wine glass; but, being afraid of him, I would not take it
out of his hand. One of the blacks therefore took it from him and gave
it to me, and I took a little down my palate, which, instead of
reviving me, as they thought it would, threw me into the greatest
consternation at the strange feeling it produced, having never tasted
any such liquor before. Soon after this the blacks who brought me on
board went off, and left me abandoned to despair. I now saw myself
deprived of all chance of returning to my native country, or even the
least glimpse of hope of gaining the shore, which I now considered as
friendly; and I even wished for my former slavery in preference to my
present situation, which was filled with horrors of every kind, still
heightened by my ignorance of what I was to undergo. I was not long
suffered to indulge my grief; I was soon put down under the decks, and
there I received such a salutation in my nostrils as I had never
experienced in my life: so that, with the loathsomeness of the stench,
and crying together, I became so sick and low that I was not able to
eat, nor had I the least desire to taste any thing. I now wished for
the last friend, death, to relieve me; but soon, to my grief, two of
the white men offered me eatables; and, on my refusing to eat, one of
them held me fast by the hands, and laid me across I think the
windlass, and tied my feet, while the other flogged me severely. I had
never experienced any thing of this kind before; and although, not
being used to the water, I naturally feared that element the first
time I saw it, yet nevertheless, could I have got over the nettings,
I would have jumped over the side, but I could not; and, besides, the
crew used to watch us very closely who were not chained down to the
decks, lest we should leap into the water: and I have seen some of
these poor African prisoners most severely cut for attempting to do
so, and hourly whipped for not eating. This indeed was often the case
with myself. In a little time after, amongst the poor chained men, I
found some of my own nation, which in a small degree gave ease to my
mind. I inquired of these what was to be done with us; they gave me to
understand we were to be carried to these white people's country to
work for them. I then was a little revived, and thought, if it were no
worse than working, my situation was not so desperate: but still I
feared I should be put to death, the white people looked and acted, as
I thought, in so savage a manner; for I had never seen among any
people such instances of brutal cruelty; and this not only shewn
towards us blacks, but also to some of the whites themselves. One
white man in particular I saw, when we were permitted to be on deck,
flogged so unmercifully with a large rope near the foremast, that he
died in consequence of it; and they tossed him over the side as they
would have done a brute. This made me fear these people the more; and
I expected nothing less than to be treated in the same manner. I could
not help expressing my fears and apprehensions to some of my
countrymen: I asked them if these people had no country, but lived in
this hollow place (the ship): they told me they did not, but came from
a distant one. 'Then,' said I, 'how comes it in all our country we
never heard of them?' They told me because they lived so very far off.
I then asked where were their women? had they any like themselves? I
was told they had: 'and why,' said I, 'do we not see them?' they
answered, because they were left behind. I asked how the vessel could
go? they told me they could not tell; but that there were cloths put
upon the masts by the help of the ropes I saw, and then the vessel
went on; and the white men had some spell or magic they put in the
water when they liked in order to stop the vessel. I was exceedingly
amazed at this account, and really thought they were spirits. I
therefore wished much to be from amongst them, for I expected they
would sacrifice me: but my wishes were vain; for we were so quartered
that it was impossible for any of us to make our escape. While we
stayed on the coast I was mostly on deck; and one day, to my great
astonishment, I saw one of these vessels coming in with the sails up.
As soon as the whites saw it, they gave a great shout, at which we
were amazed; and the more so as the vessel appeared larger by
approaching nearer. At last she came to an anchor in my sight, and
when the anchor was let go I and my countrymen who saw it were lost in
astonishment to observe the vessel stop; and were not convinced it was
done by magic. Soon after this the other ship got her boats out, and
they came on board of us, and the people of both ships seemed very
glad to see each other. Several of the strangers also shook hands with
us black people, and made motions with their hands, signifying I
suppose we were to go to their country; but we did not understand
them. At last, when the ship we were in had got in all her cargo, they
made ready with many fearful noises, and we were all put under deck,
so that we could not see how they managed the vessel. But this
disappointment was the least of my sorrow. The stench of the hold
while we were on the coast was so intolerably loathsome, that it was
dangerous to remain there for any time, and some of us had been
permitted to stay on the deck for the fresh air; but now that the
whole ship's cargo were confined together, it became absolutely
pestilential. The closeness of the place, and the heat of the climate,
added to the number in the ship, which was so crowded that each had
scarcely room to turn himself, almost suffocated us. This produced
copious perspirations, so that the air soon became unfit for
respiration, from a variety of loathsome smells, and brought on a
sickness among the slaves, of which many died, thus falling victims to
the improvident avarice, as I may call it, of their purchasers. This
wretched situation was again aggravated by the galling of the chains,
now become insupportable; and the filth of the necessary tubs, into
which the children often fell, and were almost suffocated. The shrieks
of the women, and the groans of the dying, rendered the whole a scene
of horror almost inconceivable. Happily perhaps for myself I was soon
reduced so low here that it was thought necessary to keep me almost
always on deck; and from my extreme youth I was not put in fetters. In
this situation I expected every hour to share the fate of my
companions, some of whom were almost daily brought upon deck at the
point of death, which I began to hope would soon put an end to my
miseries. Often did I think many of the inhabitants of the deep much
more happy than myself. I envied them the freedom they enjoyed, and as
often wished I could change my condition for theirs. Every
circumstance I met with served only to render my state more painful,
and heighten my apprehensions, and my opinion of the cruelty of the
whites. One day they had taken a number of fishes; and when they had
killed and satisfied themselves with as many as they thought fit, to
our astonishment who were on the deck, rather than give any of them to
us to eat as we expected, they tossed the remaining fish into the sea
again, although we begged and prayed for some as well as we could, but
in vain; and some of my countrymen, being pressed by hunger, took an
opportunity, when they thought no one saw them, of trying to get a
little privately; but they were discovered, and the attempt procured
them some very severe floggings. One day, when we had a smooth sea and
moderate wind, two of my wearied countrymen who were chained together
(I was near them at the time), preferring death to such a life of
misery, somehow made through the nettings and jumped into the sea:
immediately another quite dejected fellow, who, on account of his
illness, was suffered to be out of irons, also followed their example;
and I believe many more would very soon have done the same if they had
not been prevented by the ship's crew, who were instantly alarmed.
Those of us that were the most active were in a moment put down under
the deck, and there was such a noise and confusion amongst the people
of the ship as I never heard before, to stop her, and get the boat out
to go after the slaves. However two of the wretches were drowned, but
they got the other, and afterwards flogged him unmercifully for thus
attempting to prefer death to slavery. In this manner we continued to
undergo more hardships than I can now relate, hardships which are
inseparable from this accursed trade. Many a time we were near
suffocation from the want of fresh air, which we were often without
for whole days together. This, and the stench of the necessary tubs,
carried off many. During our passage I first saw flying fishes, which
surprised me very much: they used frequently to fly across the ship,
and many of them fell on the deck. I also now first saw the use of the
quadrant; I had often with astonishment seen the mariners make
observations with it, and I could not think what it meant. They at
last took notice of my surprise; and one of them, willing to increase
it, as well as to gratify my curiosity, made me one day look through
it. The clouds appeared to me to be land, which disappeared as they
passed along. This heightened my wonder; and I was now more persuaded
than ever that I was in another world, and that every thing about me
was magic. At last we came in sight of the island of Barbadoes, at
which the whites on board gave a great shout, and made many signs of
joy to us. We did not know what to think of this; but as the vessel
drew nearer we plainly saw the harbour, and other ships of different
kinds and sizes; and we soon anchored amongst them off Bridge Town.
Many merchants and planters now came on board, though it was in the
evening. They put us in separate parcels, and examined us attentively.
They also made us jump, and pointed to the land, signifying we were to
go there. We thought by this we should be eaten by these ugly men, as
they appeared to us; and, when soon after we were all put down under
the deck again, there was much dread and trembling among us, and
nothing but bitter cries to be heard all the night from these
apprehensions, insomuch that at last the white people got some old
slaves from the land to pacify us. They told us we were not to be
eaten, but to work, and were soon to go on land, where we should see
many of our country people. This report eased us much; and sure
enough, soon after we were landed, there came to us Africans of all
languages. We were conducted immediately to the merchant's yard, where
we were all pent up together like so many sheep in a fold, without
regard to sex or age. As every object was new to me every thing I saw
filled me with surprise. What struck me first was that the houses were
built with stories, and in every other respect different from those in
Africa: but I was still more astonished on seeing people on horseback.
I did not know what this could mean; and indeed I thought these people
were full of nothing but magical arts. While I was in this
astonishment one of my fellow prisoners spoke to a countryman of his
about the horses, who said they were the same kind they had in their
country. I understood them, though they were from a distant part of
Africa, and I thought it odd I had not seen any horses there; but
afterwards, when I came to converse with different Africans, I found
they had many horses amongst them, and much larger than those I then
saw. We were not many days in the merchant's custody before we were
sold after their usual manner, which is this:--On a signal given,(as
the beat of a drum) the buyers rush at once into the yard where the
slaves are confined, and make choice of that parcel they like best.
The noise and clamour with which this is attended, and the eagerness
visible in the countenances of the buyers, serve not a little to
increase the apprehensions of the terrified Africans, who may well be
supposed to consider them as the ministers of that destruction to
which they think themselves devoted. In this manner, without scruple,
are relations and friends separated, most of them never to see each
other again. I remember in the vessel in which I was brought over, in
the men's apartment, there were several brothers, who, in the sale,
were sold in different lots; and it was very moving on this occasion
to see and hear their cries at parting. O, ye nominal Christians!
might not an African ask you, learned you this from your God, who says
unto you, Do unto all men as you would men should do unto you? Is it
not enough that we are torn from our country and friends to toil for
your luxury and lust of gain? Must every tender feeling be likewise
sacrificed to your avarice? Are the dearest friends and relations, now
rendered more dear by their separation from their kindred, still to be
parted from each other, and thus prevented from cheering the gloom of
slavery with the small comfort of being together and mingling their
sufferings and sorrows? Why are parents to lose their children,
brothers their sisters, or husbands their wives? Surely this is a new
refinement in cruelty, which, while it has no advantage to atone for
it, thus aggravates distress, and adds fresh horrors even to the
wretchedness of slavery.




CHAP. III.

     _The author is carried to Virginia--His distress--Surprise
     at seeing a picture and a watch--Is bought by Captain
     Pascal, and sets out for England--His terror during the
     voyage--Arrives in England--His wonder at a fall of snow--Is
     sent to Guernsey, and in some time goes on board a ship of
     war with his master--Some account of the expedition against
     Louisbourg under the command of Admiral Boscawen, in 1758._


I now totally lost the small remains of comfort I had enjoyed in
conversing with my countrymen; the women too, who used to wash and
take care of me, were all gone different ways, and I never saw one of
them afterwards.

I stayed in this island for a few days; I believe it could not be
above a fortnight; when I and some few more slaves, that were not
saleable amongst the rest, from very much fretting, were shipped off
in a sloop for North America. On the passage we were better treated
than when we were coming from Africa, and we had plenty of rice and
fat pork. We were landed up a river a good way from the sea, about
Virginia county, where we saw few or none of our native Africans, and
not one soul who could talk to me. I was a few weeks weeding grass,
and gathering stones in a plantation; and at last all my companions
were distributed different ways, and only myself was left. I was now
exceedingly miserable, and thought myself worse off than any of the
rest of my companions; for they could talk to each other, but I had no
person to speak to that I could understand. In this state I was
constantly grieving and pining, and wishing for death rather than any
thing else. While I was in this plantation the gentleman, to whom I
suppose the estate belonged, being unwell, I was one day sent for to
his dwelling house to fan him; when I came into the room where he was
I was very much affrighted at some things I saw, and the more so as I
had seen a black woman slave as I came through the house, who was
cooking the dinner, and the poor creature was cruelly loaded with
various kinds of iron machines; she had one particularly on her head,
which locked her mouth so fast that she could scarcely speak; and
could not eat nor drink. I was much astonished and shocked at this
contrivance, which I afterwards learned was called the iron muzzle.
Soon after I had a fan put into my hand, to fan the gentleman while he
slept; and so I did indeed with great fear. While he was fast asleep I
indulged myself a great deal in looking about the room, which to me
appeared very fine and curious. The first object that engaged my
attention was a watch which hung on the chimney, and was going. I was
quite surprised at the noise it made, and was afraid it would tell the
gentleman any thing I might do amiss: and when I immediately after
observed a picture hanging in the room, which appeared constantly to
look at me, I was still more affrighted, having never seen such things
as these before. At one time I thought it was something relative to
magic; and not seeing it move I thought it might be some way the
whites had to keep their great men when they died, and offer them
libation as we used to do to our friendly spirits. In this state of
anxiety I remained till my master awoke, when I was dismissed out of
the room, to my no small satisfaction and relief; for I thought that
these people were all made up of wonders. In this place I was called
Jacob; but on board the African snow I was called Michael. I had been
some time in this miserable, forlorn, and much dejected state, without
having any one to talk to, which made my life a burden, when the kind
and unknown hand of the Creator (who in very deed leads the blind in a
way they know not) now began to appear, to my comfort; for one day the
captain of a merchant ship, called the Industrious Bee, came on some
business to my master's house. This gentleman, whose name was Michael
Henry Pascal, was a lieutenant in the royal navy, but now commanded
this trading ship, which was somewhere in the confines of the county
many miles off. While he was at my master's house it happened that he
saw me, and liked me so well that he made a purchase of me. I think I
have often heard him say he gave thirty or forty pounds sterling for
me; but I do not now remember which. However, he meant me for a
present to some of his friends in England: and I was sent accordingly
from the house of my then master, one Mr. Campbell, to the place where
the ship lay; I was conducted on horseback by an elderly black man, (a
mode of travelling which appeared very odd to me). When I arrived I
was carried on board a fine large ship, loaded with tobacco, &c. and
just ready to sail for England. I now thought my condition much
mended; I had sails to lie on, and plenty of good victuals to eat; and
every body on board used me very kindly, quite contrary to what I had
seen of any white people before; I therefore began to think that they
were not all of the same disposition. A few days after I was on board
we sailed for England. I was still at a loss to conjecture my destiny.
By this time, however, I could smatter a little imperfect English; and
I wanted to know as well as I could where we were going. Some of the
people of the ship used to tell me they were going to carry me back to
my own country, and this made me very happy. I was quite rejoiced at
the sound of going back; and thought if I should get home what wonders
I should have to tell. But I was reserved for another fate, and was
soon undeceived when we came within sight of the English coast. While
I was on board this ship, my captain and master named me _Gustavus
Vassa_. I at that time began to understand him a little, and refused to
be called so, and told him as well as I could that I would be called
Jacob; but he said I should not, and still called me Gustavus; and
when I refused to answer to my new name, which at first I did, it
gained me many a cuff; so at length I submitted, and was obliged to
bear the present name, by which I have been known ever since. The ship
had a very long passage; and on that account we had very short
allowance of provisions. Towards the last we had only one pound and a
half of bread per week, and about the same quantity of meat, and one
quart of water a-day. We spoke with only one vessel the whole time we
were at sea, and but once we caught a few fishes. In our extremities
the captain and people told me in jest they would kill and eat me; but
I thought them in earnest, and was depressed beyond measure, expecting
every moment to be my last. While I was in this situation one evening
they caught, with a good deal of trouble, a large shark, and got it on
board. This gladdened my poor heart exceedingly, as I thought it would
serve the people to eat instead of their eating me; but very soon, to
my astonishment, they cut off a small part of the tail, and tossed the
rest over the side. This renewed my consternation; and I did not know
what to think of these white people, though I very much feared they
would kill and eat me. There was on board the ship a young lad who had
never been at sea before, about four or five years older than myself:
his name was Richard Baker. He was a native of America, had received
an excellent education, and was of a most amiable temper. Soon after I
went on board he shewed me a great deal of partiality and attention,
and in return I grew extremely fond of him. We at length became
inseparable; and, for the space of two years, he was of very great use
to me, and was my constant companion and instructor. Although this
dear youth had many slaves of his own, yet he and I have gone through
many sufferings together on shipboard; and we have many nights lain in
each other's bosoms when we were in great distress. Thus such a
friendship was cemented between us as we cherished till his death,
which, to my very great sorrow, happened in the year 1759, when he was
up the Archipelago, on board his majesty's ship the Preston: an event
which I have never ceased to regret, as I lost at once a kind
interpreter, an agreeable companion, and a faithful friend; who, at
the age of fifteen, discovered a mind superior to prejudice; and who
was not ashamed to notice, to associate with, and to be the friend and
instructor of one who was ignorant, a stranger, of a different
complexion, and a slave! My master had lodged in his mother's house in
America: he respected him very much, and made him always eat with him
in the cabin. He used often to tell him jocularly that he would kill
me to eat. Sometimes he would say to me--the black people were not
good to eat, and would ask me if we did not eat people in my country.
I said, No: then he said he would kill Dick (as he always called him)
first, and afterwards me. Though this hearing relieved my mind a
little as to myself, I was alarmed for Dick and whenever he was called
I used to be very much afraid he was to be killed; and I would peep
and watch to see if they were going to kill him: nor was I free from
this consternation till we made the land. One night we lost a man
overboard; and the cries and noise were so great and confused, in
stopping the ship, that I, who did not know what was the matter,
began, as usual, to be very much afraid, and to think they were going
to make an offering with me, and perform some magic; which I still
believed they dealt in. As the waves were very high I thought the
Ruler of the seas was angry, and I expected to be offered up to
appease him. This filled my mind with agony, and I could not any more
that night close my eyes again to rest. However, when daylight
appeared I was a little eased in my mind; but still every time I was
called I used to think it was to be killed. Some time after this we
saw some very large fish, which I afterwards found were called
grampusses. They looked to me extremely terrible, and made their
appearance just at dusk; and were so near as to blow the water on the
ship's deck. I believed them to be the rulers of the sea; and, as the
white people did not make any offerings at any time, I thought they
were angry with them: and, at last, what confirmed my belief was, the
wind just then died away, and a calm ensued, and in consequence of it
the ship stopped going. I supposed that the fish had performed this,
and I hid myself in the fore part of the ship, through fear of being
offered up to appease them, every minute peeping and quaking: but my
good friend Dick came shortly towards me, and I took an opportunity to
ask him, as well as I could, what these fish were. Not being able to
talk much English, I could but just make him understand my question;
and not at all, when I asked him if any offerings were to be made to
them: however, he told me these fish would swallow any body; which
sufficiently alarmed me. Here he was called away by the captain, who
was leaning over the quarter-deck railing and looking at the fish; and
most of the people were busied in getting a barrel of pitch to light,
for them to play with. The captain now called me to him, having
learned some of my apprehensions from Dick; and having diverted
himself and others for some time with my fears, which appeared
ludicrous enough in my crying and trembling, he dismissed me. The
barrel of pitch was now lighted and put over the side into the water:
by this time it was just dark, and the fish went after it; and, to my
great joy, I saw them no more.

However, all my alarms began to subside when we got sight of land; and
at last the ship arrived at Falmouth, after a passage of thirteen
weeks. Every heart on board seemed gladdened on our reaching the
shore, and none more than mine. The captain immediately went on shore,
and sent on board some fresh provisions, which we wanted very much:
we made good use of them, and our famine was soon turned into
feasting, almost without ending. It was about the beginning of the
spring 1757 when I arrived in England, and I was near twelve years of
age at that time. I was very much struck with the buildings and the
pavement of the streets in Falmouth; and, indeed, any object I saw
