Moses Maimonides, The Guide for the Perplexed (~1190)
Translated by M. Friedlander, Second Edition (London, 1910)

Source: Project Gutenberg
https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/73584

Note: These are selected excerpts from the Guide for the Perplexed.
The full work is divided into three parts and covers theology, metaphysics,
and the interpretation of Scripture. The excerpts below include:
1. The Dedicatory Letter and Introduction (on the purpose of the work)
2. Part I, Chapters I-V (on interpreting Biblical language about God)
3. Part I, Chapters L-LXI (on the attributes of God / negative theology)

---

PART I: SELECTED CHAPTERS (I-V)

CHAPTER I


Some have been of opinion that by the Hebrew ẓelem, the shape and
figure of a thing is to be understood, and this explanation led men to
believe in the corporeality [of the Divine Being]: for they thought
that the words “Let us make man in our ẓelem” (Gen. i. 26), implied
that God had the form of a human being, i.e., that He had figure and
shape, and that, consequently, He was corporeal. They adhered
faithfully to this view, and thought that if they were to relinquish it
they would eo ipso reject the truth of the Bible: and further, if they
did not conceive God as having a body possessed of face and limbs,
similar to their own in appearance, they would have to deny even the
existence of God. The sole difference which they admitted, was that He
excelled in greatness and splendour, and that His substance was not
flesh and blood. Thus far went their conception of the greatness and
glory of God. The incorporeality of the Divine Being, and His unity, in
the true sense of the word—for there is no real unity without
incorporeality—will be fully proved in the course of the present
treatise. (Part II., ch. i.) In this chapter it is our sole intention
to explain the meaning of the words ẓelem and demut. I hold that the
Hebrew equivalent of “form” in the ordinary acceptation of the word,
viz., the figure and shape of a thing, is toär. Thus we find “[And
Joseph was] beautiful in toär (‘form’), and beautiful in appearance”
(Gen. xxxix. 6): “What form (toär) is he of?” (1 Sam. xxviii. 14): “As
the form (toär) of the children of a king” (Judges viii. 18). It is
also applied to form produced by human labour, as “He marketh its form
(toär) with a line,” “and he marketh its form (toär) with the compass”
(Isa. xliv. 13). This term is not at all applicable to God. The term
ẓelem, on the other hand, signifies the specific form, viz., that which
constitutes the essence of a thing, whereby the thing is what it is;
the reality of a thing in so far as it is that particular being. In man
the “form” is that constituent which gives him human perception: and on
account of this intellectual perception the term ẓelem is employed in
the sentences “In the ẓelem of God he created him” (Gen. i. 27). It is
therefore rightly said, “Thou despisest their ẓelem” (Ps. lxiii. 20);
the “contempt” can only concern the soul—the specific form of man, not
the properties and shape of his body. I am also of opinion that the
reason why this term is used for “idols” may be found in the
circumstance that they are worshipped on account of some idea
represented by them, not on account of their figure and shape. For the
same reason the term is used in the expression, “the forms (ẓalme) of
your emerods” (1 Sam. vi. 5), for the chief object was the removal of
the injury caused by the emerods, not a change of their shape. As,
however, it must be admitted that the term ẓelem is employed in these
two cases, viz. “the images of the emerods” and “the idols” on account
of the external shape, the term ẓelem is either a homonym or a hybrid
term, and would denote both the specific form and the outward shape,
and similar properties relating to the dimensions and the shape of
material bodies; and in the phrase “Let us make man in our ẓelem” (Gen.
i. 26), the term signifies “the specific form” of man, viz., his
intellectual perception, and does not refer to his “figure” or “shape.”
Thus we have shown the difference between ẓelem and toär, and explained
the meaning of ẓelem.

Demut is derived from the verb damah, “he is like.” This term likewise
denotes agreement with regard to some abstract relation: comp. “I am
like a pelican of the wilderness” (Ps. cii. 7); the author does not
compare himself to the pelican in point of wings and feathers, but in
point of sadness. “Nor any tree in the garden of God was like unto him
in beauty” (Ezek. xxxi. 8); the comparison refers to the idea of
beauty. “Their poison is like the poison of a serpent” (Ps. lviii. 5);
“He is like unto a lion” (Ps. xvii. 12); the resemblance indicated in
these passages does not refer to the figure and shape, but to some
abstract idea. In the same manner is used “the likeness of the throne”
(Ezek. i. 26); the comparison is made with regard to greatness and
glory, not, as many believe, with regard to its square form, its
breadth, or the length of its legs: this explanation applies also to
the phrase “the likeness of the ḥayyot” (“living creatures,” Ezek. i.
13).

As man’s distinction consists in a property which no other creature on
earth possesses, viz., intellectual perception, in the exercise of
which he does not employ his senses, nor move his hand or his foot,
this perception has been compared—though only apparently, not in
truth—to the Divine perception, which requires no corporeal organ. On
this account, i.e., on account of the Divine intellect with which man
has been endowed, he is said to have been made in the form and likeness
of the Almighty, but far from it be the notion that the Supreme Being
is corporeal, having a material form.






CHAPTER II


Some years ago a learned man asked me a question of great importance;
the problem and the solution which we gave in our reply deserve the
closest attention. Before, however, entering upon this problem and its
solution I must premise that every Hebrew knows that the term Elohim is
a homonym, and denotes God, angels, judges, and the rulers of
countries, and that Onkelos the proselyte explained it in the true and
correct manner by taking Elohim in the sentence, “and ye shall be like
Elohim” (Gen. iii. 5) in the last-mentioned meaning, and rendering the
sentence “and ye shall be like princes.” Having pointed out the
homonymity of the term “Elohim” we return to the question under
consideration. “It would at first sight,” said the objector, “appear
from Scripture that man was originally intended to be perfectly equal
to the rest of the animal creation, which is not endowed with
intellect, reason, or power of distinguishing between good and evil:
but that Adam’s disobedience to the command of God procured him that
great perfection which is the peculiarity of man, viz., the power of
distinguishing between good and evil—the noblest of all the faculties
of our nature, the essential characteristic of the human race. It thus
appears strange that the punishment for rebelliousness should be the
means of elevating man to a pinnacle of perfection to which he had not
attained previously. This is equivalent to saying that a certain man
was rebellious and extremely wicked, wherefore his nature was changed
for the better, and he was made to shine as a star in the heavens.”
Such was the purport and subject of the question, though not in the
exact words of the inquirer. Now mark our reply, which was as
follows:—“You appear to have studied the matter superficially, and
nevertheless you imagine that you can understand a book which has been
the guide of past and present generations, when you for a moment
withdraw from your lusts and appetites, and glance over its contents as
if you were reading a historical work or some poetical composition.
Collect your thoughts and examine the matter carefully, for it is not
to be understood as you at first sight think, but as you will find
after due deliberation; namely, the intellect which was granted to man
as the highest endowment, was bestowed on him before his disobedience.
With reference to this gift the Bible states that “man was created in
the form and likeness of God.” On account of this gift of intellect man
was addressed by God, and received His commandments, as it is said:
“And the Lord God commanded Adam” (Gen. ii. 16)—for no commandments are
given to the brute creation or to those who are devoid of
understanding. Through the intellect man distinguishes between the true
and the false. This faculty Adam possessed perfectly and completely.
The right and the wrong are terms employed in the science of apparent
truths (morals), not in that of necessary truths, as, e.g., it is not
correct to say, in reference to the proposition “the heavens are
spherical,” it is “good” or to declare the assertion that “the earth is
flat” to be “bad”; but we say of the one it is true, of the other it is
false. Similarly our language expresses the idea of true and false by
the terms emet and sheker, of the morally right and the morally wrong,
by tob and ra’. Thus it is the function of the intellect to
discriminate between the true and the false—a distinction which is
applicable to all objects of intellectual perception. When Adam was yet
in a state of innocence, and was guided solely by reflection and
reason—on account of which it is said: “Thou hast made him (man) little
lower than the angels” (Ps. viii. 6)—he was not at all able to follow
or to understand the principles of apparent truths; the most manifest
impropriety, viz., to appear in a state of nudity, was nothing
unbecoming according to his idea: he could not comprehend why it should
be so. After man’s disobedience, however, when he began to give way to
desires which had their source in his imagination and to the
gratification of his bodily appetites, as it is said, “And the wife saw
that the tree was good for food and delightful to the eyes” (Gen. iii.
6), he was punished by the loss of part of that intellectual faculty
which he had previously possessed. He therefore transgressed a command
with which he had been charged on the score of his reason; and having
obtained a knowledge of the apparent truths, he was wholly absorbed in
the study of what is proper and what improper. Then he fully understood
the magnitude of the loss he had sustained, what he had forfeited, and
in what situation he was thereby placed. Hence we read, “And ye shall
be like elohim, knowing good and evil,” and not “knowing” or
“discerning the true and the false”: while in necessary truths we can
only apply the words “true and false,” not “good and evil.” Further
observe the passage, “And the eyes of both were opened, and they knew
they were naked” (Gen. iii. 7): it is not said, “And the eyes of both
were opened, and they saw”; for what the man had seen previously and
what he saw after this circumstance was precisely the same; there had
been no blindness which was now removed, but he received a new faculty
whereby he found things wrong which previously he had not regarded as
wrong. Besides, you must know that the Hebrew word pakaḥ used in this
passage is exclusively employed in the figurative sense of receiving
new sources of knowledge, not in that of regaining the sense of sight.
Comp., “God opened her eyes” (Gen. xxi. 19). “Then shall the eyes of
the blind be opened” (Isaiah xxxviii. 8). “Open ears, he heareth not”
(ibid. xlii. 20), similar in sense to the verse, “Which have eyes to
see, and see not” (Ezek. xii. 2). When, however, Scripture says of
Adam, “He changed his face (panav) and thou sentest him forth” (Job
xiv. 20), it must be understood in the following way: On account of the
change of his original aim he was sent away. For panim, the Hebrew
equivalent of face, is derived from the verb panah, “he turned,” and
signifies also “aim,” because man generally turns his face towards the
thing he desires. In accordance with this interpretation, our text
suggests that Adam, as he altered his intention and directed his
thoughts to the acquisition of what he was forbidden, he was banished
from Paradise: this was his punishment; it was measure for measure. At
first he had the privilege of tasting pleasure and happiness, and of
enjoying repose and security; but as his appetites grew stronger, and
he followed his desires and impulses, (as we have already stated
above), and partook of the food he was forbidden to taste, he was
deprived of everything, was doomed to subsist on the meanest kind of
food, such as he never tasted before, and this even only after exertion
and labour, as it is said, “Thorns and thistles shall grow up for thee”
(Gen. iii. 18), “By the sweat of thy brow,” etc., and in explanation of
this the text continues, “And the Lord God drove him from the Garden of
Eden, to till the ground whence he was taken.” He was now with respect
to food and many other requirements brought to the level of the lower
animals; comp., “Thou shalt eat the grass of the field” (Gen. iii. 18).
Reflecting on his condition, the Psalmist says, “Adam unable to dwell
in dignity, was brought to the level of the dumb beast” (Ps. xlix. 13).

“May the Almighty be praised, whose design and wisdom cannot be
fathomed.”






CHAPTER III


It might be thought that the Hebrew words temunah and tabnit have one
and the same meaning, but this is not the case. Tabnit, derived from
the verb banah (he built), signifies the build and construction of a
thing—that is to say, its figure, whether square, round, triangular, or
of any other shape. Comp. “the pattern (tabnit) of the Tabernacle and
the pattern (tabnit) of all its vessels” (Exod. xxv. 9); “according to
the pattern (tabnit) which thou wast shown upon the mount” (Exod. xxv.
40); “the form of any bird” (Deut. iv. 17); “the form (tabnit) of a
hand” (Ezek. viii. 3); “the pattern (tabnit) of the porch” (1 Chron.
xxviii. 11). In all these quotations it is the shape which is referred
to. Therefore the Hebrew language never employs the word tabnit in
speaking of the qualities of God Almighty.

The term temunah, on the other hand, is used in the Bible in three
different senses. It signifies, first, the outlines of things which are
perceived by our bodily senses, i.e., their shape and form; as, e.g.,
“And ye make an image the form (temunat) of some likeness” (Deut. iv.
16); “for ye saw no likeness” (temunah) (Deut. iv. 15). Secondly, the
forms of our imagination, i.e., the impressions retained in imagination
when the objects have ceased to affect our senses. In this sense it is
used in the passage which begins “In thoughts from the visions of the
night” (Job iv. 13), and which concludes “it remained but I could not
recognize its sight, only an image—temunah—was before my eyes,” i.e.,
an image which presented itself to my sight during sleep. Thirdly, the
true form of an object, which is perceived only by the intellect: and
it is in this third signification that the term is applied to God. The
words “And the similitude of the Lord shall he behold” (Num. xii. 8)
therefore mean “he shall comprehend the true essence of the Lord.”






CHAPTER IV


The three verbs raah, hibbit, and ḥazah, which denote “he perceived
with the eye,” are also used figuratively in the sense of intellectual
perception. As regards the first of these verbs this is well known,
e.g., “And he looked (va-yar) and behold a well in the field” (Gen.
xxix. 2): here it signifies ocular perception; “yea, my heart has seen
(raah) much of wisdom and of knowledge” (Eccles. i. 16); in this
passage it refers to the intellectual perception.

In this figurative sense the verb is to be understood, when applied to
God; e.g., “I saw (raïti) the Lord” (1 Kings xxii. 19); “And the Lord
appeared (va-yera) unto him” (Gen. xviii. 1); “And God saw (va-yar)
that it was good” (Gen. i. 10); “I beseech thee, show me (hareni) thy
glory” (Exod. xxxiii. 18); “And they saw (va-yirü) the God of Israel”
(Exod. xxiv. 10). All these instances refer to intellectual perception,
and by no means to perception with the eye as in its literal meaning:
for, on the one hand, the eye can only perceive a corporeal object, and
in connection with it certain accidents, as colour, shape, etc.; and,
on the other hand, God does not perceive by means of a corporeal organ,
as will be explained.

In the same manner the Hebrew hibbit signifies “he viewed” with the
eye; comp. “Look (tabbit) not behind thee” (Gen. xix. 17); “But his
wife looked (va-tabbet) back from him” (Gen. xix. 26); “And if one look
(ve-nibbat) unto the land” (Isa. v. 30); and figuratively, “to view and
observe” with the intellect, “to contemplate” a thing till it be
understood. In this sense the verb is used in passages like the
following: “He hath not beheld (hibbit) iniquity in Jacob” (Num. xxiii.
21); for “iniquity” cannot be seen with the eye. The words, “And they
looked (ve-hibbitu) after Moses” (Exod. xxxiii. 8)—in addition to the
literal understanding of the phrase—were explained by our Sages in a
figurative sense. According to them, these words mean that the
Israelites examined and criticised the actions and sayings of Moses.
Compare also “Contemplate (habbet), I pray thee, the heaven” (Gen. xv.
5); for this took place in a prophetic vision. This verb, when applied
to God, is employed in this figurative sense; e.g., “to look
(me-habbit) upon God” (Exod. iii. 6); “And the similitude of the Lord
shall he behold” (yabbit) (Num. xii. 8); “And thou canst not look
(habbet) on iniquity” (Hab. i. 13).

The same explanation applies to ḥazah. It denotes to view with the eye,
as: “And let our eye look (ve-taḥaz) upon Zion” (Mic. iv. 11); and also
figuratively, to perceive mentally: “which he saw (ḥazah) concerning
Judah and Jerusalem” (Isa. i. 1); “The word of the Lord came unto
Abraham in a vision” (maḥazeh) (Gen. xv. 1): in this sense ḥazah is
used in the phrase, “Also they saw (va-yeḥezu) God” (Exod. xxiv. 11).
Note this well.






CHAPTER V


When the chief of philosophers [Aristotle] was about to inquire into
some very profound subjects, and to establish his theory by proofs, he
commenced his treatise with an apology, and requested the reader to
attribute the author’s inquiries not to presumption, vanity, egotism,
or arrogance, as though he were interfering with things of which he had
no knowledge, but rather to his zeal and his desire to discover and
establish true doctrines, as far as lay in human power. We take the
same position, and think that a man, when he commences to speculate,
ought not to embark at once on a subject so vast and important; he
should previously adapt himself to the study of the several branches of
science and knowledge, should most thoroughly refine his moral
character and subdue his passions and desires, the offspring of his
imagination; when, in addition, he has obtained a knowledge of the true
fundamental propositions, a comprehension of the several methods of
inference and proof, and the capacity of guarding against fallacies,
then he may approach the investigation of this subject. He must,
however, not decide any question by the first idea that suggests itself
to his mind, or at once direct his thoughts and force them to obtain a
knowledge of the Creator, but he must wait modestly and patiently, and
advance step by step.

In this sense we must understand the words “And Moses hid his face, for
he was afraid to look upon God” (Exod. iii. 6), though retaining also
the literal meaning of the passage, that Moses was afraid to gaze at
the light which appeared to his eye; but it must on no account be
assumed that the Being which is exalted far above every imperfection
can be perceived by the eye. This act of Moses was highly commended by
God, who bestowed on him a well deserved portion of His goodness, as it
is said: “And the similitude of the Lord shall he behold” (Num. xii.
8). This, say our Sages, was the reward for having previously hidden
his face, lest he should gaze at the Eternal. (Talm. B. Berakot Fa.)

But “the nobles of the Children of Israel” were impetuous, and allowed
their thoughts to go unrestrained: what they perceived was but
imperfect. Therefore it is said of them, “And they saw the God of
Israel, and there was under his feet,” etc. (Exod. xxiv. 10); and not
merely, “and they saw the God of Israel”; the purpose of the whole
passage is to criticize their act of seeing and not to describe it.
They are blamed for the nature of their perception, which was to a
certain extent corporeal—a result which necessarily followed, from the
fact that they ventured too far before being perfectly prepared. They
deserved to perish, but at the intercession of Moses this fate was
averted by God for the time. They were afterwards burnt at Taberah,
except Nadab and Abihu, who were burnt in the Tabernacle of the
congregation, according to what is stated by authentic tradition.
(Midr. Rabba ad locum.)

If such was the case with them, how much more is it incumbent on us who
are inferior, and on those who are below us, to persevere in perfecting
our knowledge of the elements, and in rightly understanding the
preliminaries which purify the mind from the defilement of error; then
we may enter the holy and divine camp in order to gaze: as the Bible
says, “And let the priests also, which come near to the Lord, sanctify
themselves, lest the Lord break forth upon them” (Exod. xix. 22).
Solomon, also, has cautioned all who endeavour to attain this high
degree of knowledge in the following figurative terms, “Keep thy foot
when thou goest to the house of God” (Eccles. iv. 17).

I will now return to complete what I commenced to explain. The nobles
of the Children of Israel, besides erring in their perception, were,
through this cause, also misled in their actions; for in consequence of
their confused perception, they gave way to bodily cravings. This is
meant by the words, “Also they saw God and did eat and drink” (Exod.
xxiv. 11). The principal part of that passage, viz., “And there was
under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone” (Exod.
xxiv. 10), will be further explained in the course of the present
treatise (ch. xxviii.). All we here intend to say is, that wherever in
a similar connection any one of the three verbs mentioned above occurs,
it has reference to intellectual perception, not to the sensation of
sight by the eye; for God is not a being to be perceived by the eye.

It will do no harm, however, if those who are unable to comprehend what
we here endeavour to explain should refer all the words in question to
sensuous perception, to seeing lights created [for the purpose],
angels, or similar beings.

============================================================

PART I: SELECTED CHAPTERS (L-LXI) — ON THE ATTRIBUTES OF GOD

CHAPTER L


When reading my present treatise, bear in mind that by “faith” we do
not understand merely that which is uttered with the lips, but also
that which is apprehended by the soul, the conviction that the object
[of belief] is exactly as it is apprehended. If, as regards real or
supposed truths, you content yourself with giving utterance to them in
words, without apprehending them or believing in them, especially if
you do not seek real truth, you have a very easy task as, in fact, you
will find many ignorant people professing articles of faith without
connecting any idea with them.

If, however, you have a desire to rise to a higher state, viz., that of
reflection, and truly to hold the conviction that God is One and
possesses true unity, without admitting plurality or divisibility in
any sense whatever, you must understand that God has no essential
attribute in any form or in any sense whatever, and that the rejection
of corporeality implies the rejection of essential attributes. Those
who believe that God is One, and that He has many attributes, declare
the unity with their lips, and assume plurality in their thoughts. This
is like the doctrine of the Christians, who say that He is one and He
is three, and that the three are one. Of the same character is the
doctrine of those who say that God is One, but that He has many
attributes; and that He with His attributes is One, although they deny
corporeality and affirm His most absolute freedom from matter; as if
our object were to seek forms of expression, not subjects of belief.
For belief is only possible after the apprehension of a thing; it
consists in the conviction that the thing apprehended has its existence
beyond the mind [in reality] exactly as it is conceived in the mind. If
in addition to this we are convinced that the thing cannot be different
in any way from what we believe it to be, and that no reasonable
argument can be found for the rejection of the belief or for the
admission of any deviation from it, then the belief is true. Renounce
desires and habits, follow your reason, and study what I am going to
say in the chapters which follow on the rejection of the attributes;
you will then be fully convinced of what we have said; you will be of
those who truly conceive the Unity of God, not of those who utter it
with their lips without thought, like men of whom it has been said,
“Thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins” (Jer. xii. 2).
It is right that a man should belong to that class of men who have a
conception of truth and understand it, though they do not speak of it.
Thus the pious are advised and addressed, “Commune with your own heart
upon your bed and be still. Selah.” (Ps. iv. 5.)






CHAPTER LI


There are many things whose existence is manifest and obvious; some of
these are innate notions or objects of sensation, others are nearly so;
and in fact they would require no proof if man had been left in his
primitive state. Such are the existence of motion, of man’s free will,
of phases of production and destruction, and of the natural properties
perceived by the senses, e.g., the heat of fire, the coldness of water,
and many other similar things. False notions, however, may be spread
either by a person labouring under error, or by one who has some
particular end in view, and who establishes theories contrary to the
real nature of things, by denying the existence of things perceived by
the senses, or by affirming the existence of what does not exist.
Philosophers are thus required to establish by proof things which are
self-evident, and to disprove the existence of things which only exist
in man’s imagination. Thus Aristotle gives a proof for the existence of
motion, because it had been denied; he disproves the reality of atoms,
because it had been asserted.

To the same class belongs the rejection of essential attributes in
reference to God. For it is a self-evident truth that the attribute is
not inherent in the object to which it is ascribed, but it is
superadded to its essence, and is consequently an accident; if the
attribute denoted the essence [τὸ τὶ ἦν εἶναι] of the object, it would
be either mere tautology, as if, e.g., one would say “man is man,” or
the explanation of a name, as, e.g., “man is a speaking animal”; for
the words “speaking animal” include the true essence of man, and there
is no third element besides life and speech in the definition of man;
when he, therefore, is described by the attributes of life and speech,
these are nothing but an explanation of the name “man,” that is to say,
that the thing which is called man, consists of life and speech. It
will now be clear that the attribute must be one of two things, either
the essence of the object described—in that case it is a mere
explanation of a name, and on that account we might admit the attribute
in reference to God, but we reject it from another cause as will be
shown—or the attribute is something different from the object
described, some extraneous superadded element; in that case the
attribute would be an accident, and he who merely rejects the
appellation “accidents” in reference to the attributes of God, does not
thereby alter their character; for everything superadded to the essence
of an object joins it without forming part of its essential properties,
and that constitutes an accident. Add to this the logical consequence
of admitting many attributes, viz., the existence of many eternal
beings. There cannot be any belief in the unity of God except by
admitting that He is one simple substance, without any composition or
plurality of elements; one from whatever side you view it, and by
whatever test you examine it; not divisible into two parts in any way
and by any cause, nor capable of any form of plurality either
objectively or subjectively, as will be proved in this treatise.

Some thinkers have gone so far as to say that the attributes of God are
neither His essence nor anything extraneous to His essence. This is
like the assertion of some theorists, that the ideals, i.e., the
universalia, are neither existing nor non-existent, and like the views
of others, that the atom does not fill a definite place, but keeps an
atom of space occupied; that man has no freedom of action at all, but
has acquirement. Such things are only said; they exist only in words,
not in thought, much less in reality. But as you know, and as all know
who do not delude themselves, these theories are preserved by a
multitude of words, by misleading similes sustained by declamation and
invective, and by numerous methods borrowed both from dialectics and
sophistry. If after uttering them and supporting them by such words, a
man were to examine for himself his own belief on this subject, he
would see nothing but confusion and stupidity in an endeavour to prove
the existence of things which do not exist, or to find a mean between
two opposites that have no mean. Or is there a mean between existence
and non-existence, or between the identity and non-identity of two
things? But, as we said, to such absurdities men were forced by the
great licence given to the imagination, and by the fact that every
existing material thing is necessarily imagined as a certain substance
possessing several attributes; for nothing has ever been found that
consists of one simple substance without any attribute. Guided by such
imaginations, men thought that God was also composed of many different
elements, viz., of His essence and of the attributes superadded to His
essence. Following up this comparison, some believed that God was
corporeal, and that He possessed attributes; others, abandoning this
theory, denied the corporeality, but retained the attributes. The
adherence to the literal sense of the text of Holy Writ is the source
of all this error, as I shall show in some of the chapters devoted to
this theme.






CHAPTER LII


Every description of an object by an affirmative attribute, which
includes the assertion that an object is of a certain kind, must be
made in one of the following five ways:—

First. The object is described by its definition, as e.g., man is
described as a being that lives and has reason; such a description,
containing the true essence of the object, is, as we have already
shown, nothing else but the explanation of a name. All agree that this
kind of description cannot be given of God; for there are no previous
causes to His existence, by which He could be defined: and on that
account it is a well-known principle, received by all the philosophers,
who are precise in their statements, that no definition can be given of
God.

Secondly. An object is described by part of its definition, as when,
e.g., man is described as a living being or as a rational being. This
kind of description includes the necessary connection [of the two
ideas]; for when we say that every man is rational we mean by it that
every being which has the characteristics of man must also have reason.
All agree that this kind of description is inappropriate in reference
to God; for if we were to speak of a portion of His essence, we should
consider His essence to be a compound. The inappropriateness of this
kind of description in reference to God is the same as that of the
preceding kind.

Thirdly. An object is described by something different from its true
essence, by something that does not complement or establish the essence
of the object. The description, therefore, relates to a quality; but
quality, in its most general sense, is an accident. If God could be
described in this way, He would be the substratum of accidents: a
sufficient reason for rejecting the idea that He possesses quality,
since it diverges from the true conception of His essence. It is
surprising how those who admit the application of attributes to God can
reject, in reference to Him, comparison and qualification. For when
they say “He cannot be qualified,” they can only mean that He possesses
no quality; and yet every positive essential attribute of an object
either constitutes its essence,—and in that case it is identical with
the essence,—or it contains a quality of the object.

There are, as you know, four kinds of quality; I will give you
instances of attributes of each kind, in order to show you that this
class of attributes cannot possibly be applied to God. (a) A man is
described by any of his intellectual or moral qualities, or by any of
the dispositions appertaining to him as an animate being, when, e.g.,
we speak of a person who is a carpenter, or who shrinks from sin, or
who is ill. It makes no difference whether we say, a carpenter, or a
sage, or a physician; by all these we represent certain physical
dispositions; nor does it make any difference whether we say
“sin-fearing” or “merciful.” Every trade, every profession, and every
settled habit of man are certain physical dispositions. All this is
clear to those who have occupied themselves with the study of Logic.
(b) A thing is described by some physical quality it possesses, or by
the absence of the same, e.g., as being soft or hard. It makes no
difference whether we say “soft or hard,” or “strong or weak”; in both
cases we speak of physical conditions. (c) A man is described by his
passive qualities, or by his emotions; we speak, e.g., of a person who
is passionate, irritable, timid, merciful, without implying that these
conditions have become permanent. The description of a thing by its
colour, taste, heat, cold, dryness, and moisture, belongs also to this
class of attributes. (d) A thing is described by any of its qualities
resulting from quantity as such; we speak, e.g., of a thing which is
long, short, curved, straight, etc.

Consider all these and similar attributes, and you will find that they
cannot be employed in reference to God. He is not a magnitude that any
quality resulting from quantity as such could be possessed by Him; He
is not affected by external influences, and therefore does not possess
any quality resulting from emotion. He is not subject to physical
conditions, and therefore does not possess strength or similar
qualities; He is not an animate being, that He should have a certain
disposition of the soul, or acquire certain properties, as meekness,
modesty, etc., or be in a state to which animate beings as such are
subject, as, e.g., in that of health or of illness. Hence it follows
that no attribute coming under the head of quality in its widest sense,
can be predicated of God. Consequently, these three classes of
attributes, describing the essence of a thing, or part of the essence,
or a quality of it, are clearly inadmissible in reference to God, for
they imply composition, which, as we shall prove, is out of question as
regards the Creator. We say, with regard to this latter point, that He
is absolutely One.

Fourthly. A thing is described by its relation to another thing, e.g.,
to time, to space, or to a different individual; thus we say, Zaid, the
father of A, or the partner of B, or who dwells at a certain place, or
who lived at a stated time. This kind of attribute does not necessarily
imply plurality or change in the essence of the object described; for
the same Zaid, to whom reference is made, is the partner of Amru, the
father of Becr, the master of Khalid, the friend of Zaid, dwells in a
certain house, and was born in a certain year. Such relations are not
the essence of a thing, nor are they so intimately connected with it as
qualities. At first thought, it would seem that they may be employed in
reference to God, but after careful and thorough consideration we are
convinced of their inadmissibility. It is quite clear that there is no
relation between God and time or space. For time is an accident
connected with motion, in so far as the latter includes the relation of
anteriority and posteriority, and is expressed by number, as is
explained in books devoted to this subject; and since motion is one of
the conditions to which only material bodies are subject, and God is
immaterial, there can be no relation between Him and time. Similarly
there is no relation between Him and space. But what we have to
investigate and to examine is this: whether some real relation exists
between God and any of the substances created by Him, by which He could
be described? That there is no correlation between Him and any of His
creatures can easily be seen; for the characteristic of two objects
correlative to each other is the equality of their reciprocal relation.
Now, as God has absolute existence, while all other beings have only
possible existence, as we shall show, there consequently cannot be any
correlation [between God and His creatures]. That a certain kind of
relation does exist between them is by some considered possible, but
wrongly. It is impossible to imagine a relation between intellect and
sight, although, as we believe, the same kind of existence is common to
both; how, then, could a relation be imagined between any creature and
God, who has nothing in common with any other being; for even the term
existence is applied to Him and other things, according to our opinion,
only by way of pure homonymity. Consequently there is no relation
whatever between Him and any other being. For whenever we speak of a
relation between two things, these belong to the same kind; but when
two things belong to different kinds though of the same class, there is
no relation between them. We therefore do not say, this red compared
with that green, is more, or less, or equally intense, although both
belong to the same class—colour; when they belong to two different
classes, there does not appear to exist any relation between them, not
even to a man of ordinary intellect, although the two things belong to
the same category; e.g., between a hundred cubits and the heat of
pepper there is no relation, the one being a quality, the other a
quantity; or between wisdom and sweetness, between meekness and
bitterness, although all these come under the head of quality in its
more general signification. How, then, could there be any relation
between God and His creatures, considering the important difference
between them in respect to true existence, the greatest of all
differences. Besides, if any relation existed between them, God would
be subject to the accident of relation; and although that would not be
an accident to the essence of God, it would still be, to some extent, a
kind of accident. You would, therefore, be wrong if you applied
affirmative attributes in their literal sense to God, though they
contained only relations; these, however, are the most appropriate of
all attributes, to be employed, in a less strict sense, in reference to
God, because they do not imply that a plurality of eternal things
exists, or that any change takes place in the essence of God, when
those things change to which God is in relation.

Fifthly. A thing is described by its actions; I do not mean by “its
actions” the inherent capacity for a certain work, as is expressed in
“carpenter,” “painter,” or “smith”—for these belong to the class of
qualities which have been mentioned above—but I mean the action the
latter has performed—we speak, e.g., of Zaid, who made this door, built
that wall, wove that garment. This kind of attributes is separate from
the essences of the thing described, and, therefore, appropriate to be
employed in describing the Creator, especially since we know that these
different actions do not imply that different elements must be
contained in the substance of the agent, by which the different actions
are produced, as will be explained. On the contrary, all the actions of
God emanate from His essence, not from any extraneous thing superadded
to His essence, as we have shown.

What we have explained in the present chapter is this: that God is one
in every respect, containing no plurality or any element superadded to
His essence: and that the many attributes of different significations
applied in Scripture to God, originate in the multitude of His actions,
not in a plurality existing in His essence, and are partly employed
with the object of conveying to us some notion of His perfection, in
accordance with what we consider perfection, as has been explained by
us. The possibility of one simple substance excluding plurality, though
accomplishing different actions, will be illustrated by examples in the
next chapter.






CHAPTER LIII


The circumstance which caused men to believe in the existence of divine
attributes is similar to that which caused others to believe in the
corporeality of God. The latter have not arrived at that belief by
speculation, but by following the literal sense of certain passages in
the Bible. The same is the case with the attributes; when in the books
of the Prophets and of the Law, God is described by attributes, such
passages are taken in their literal sense, and it is then believed that
God possesses attributes; as if He were to be exalted above
corporeality, and not above things connected with corporeality, i.e.,
the accidents, I mean psychical dispositions, all of which are
qualities [and connected with corporeality]. Every attribute which the
followers of this doctrine assume to be essential to the Creator, you
will find to express, although they do not distinctly say so, a quality
similar to those which they are accustomed to notice in the bodies of
all living beings. We apply to all such passages the principle, “The
Torah speaketh in the language of man,” and say that the object of all
these terms is to describe God as the most perfect being, not as
possessing those qualities which are only perfections in relation to
created living beings. Many of the attributes express different acts of
God, but that difference does not necessitate any difference as regards
Him from whom the acts proceed. This fact, viz., that from one agency
different effects may result, although that agency has not free will,
and much more so if it has free will, I will illustrate by an instance
taken from our own sphere. Fire melts certain things and makes others
hard, it boils and burns, it bleaches and blackens. If we described the
fire as bleaching, blackening, burning, boiling, hardening and melting,
we should be correct, and yet he who does not know the nature of fire,
would think that it included six different elements, one by which it
blackens, another by which it bleaches, a third by which it boils, a
fourth by which it consumes, a fifth by which it melts, a sixth by
which it hardens things—actions which are opposed to one another, and
of which each has its peculiar property. He, however, who knows the
nature of fire, will know that by virtue of one quality in action,
namely, by heat, it produces all these effects. If this is the case
with that which is done by nature, how much more is it the case with
regard to beings that act by free will, and still more with regard to
God, who is above all description. If we, therefore, perceive in God
certain relations of various kinds—for wisdom in us is different from
power, and power from will—it does by no means follow that different
elements are really contained in Him, that He contains one element by
which He knows, another by which He wills, and another by which He
exercises power, as is, in fact, the signification of the attributes of
God according to the Attributists. Some of them express it plainly, and
enumerate the attributes as elements added to the essence. Others,
however, are more reserved with regard to this matter, but indicate
their opinion, though they do not express it in distinct and
intelligible words. Thus, e.g., some of them say: “God is omnipotent by
His essence, wise by His essence, living by His essence, and endowed
with a will by His essence.” (I will mention to you, as an instance,
man’s reason, which being one faculty and implying no plurality,
enables him to know many arts and sciences; by the same faculty man is
able to sow, to do carpenter’s work, to weave, to build, to study, to
acquire a knowledge of geometry, and to govern a state. These various
acts resulting from one simple faculty, which involves no plurality,
are very numerous; their number, that is, the number of the actions
originating in man’s reason, is almost infinite. It is therefore
intelligible how in reference to God, those different actions can be
caused by one simple substance, that does not include any plurality or
any additional element. The attributes found in Holy Scripture are
either qualifications of His actions, without any reference to His
essence, or indicate absolute perfection, but do not imply that the
essence of God is a compound of various elements.) For in not admitting
the term “compound,” they do not reject the idea of a compound when
they admit a substance with attributes.

There still remains one difficulty which led them to that error, and
which I am now going to mention. Those who assert the existence of the
attributes do not found their opinion on the variety of God’s actions;
they say it is true that one substance can be the source of various
effects, but His essential attributes cannot be qualifications of His
actions, because it is impossible to imagine that the Creator created
Himself. They vary with regard to the so-called essential attributes—I
mean as regards their number—according to the text of the Scripture
which each of them follows. I will enumerate those on which all agree,
and the knowledge of which they believe that they have derived from
reasoning, not from some words of the Prophets, namely, the following
four:—life, power, wisdom, and will. They believe that these are four
different things, and such perfections as cannot possibly be absent
from the Creator, and that these cannot be qualifications of His
actions. This is their opinion. But you must know that wisdom and life
in reference to God are not different from each other; for in every
being that is conscious of itself, life and wisdom are the same thing,
that is to say, if by wisdom we understand the consciousness of self.
Besides, the subject and the object of that consciousness are
undoubtedly identical [as regards God]; for according to our opinion,
He is not composed of an element that apprehends, and another that does
not apprehend; He is not like man, who is a combination of a conscious
soul and an unconscious body. If, therefore, by “wisdom” we mean the
faculty of self-consciousness, wisdom and life are one and the same
thing. They, however, do not speak of wisdom in this sense, but of His
power to apprehend His creatures. There is also no doubt that power and
will do not exist in God in reference to Himself; for He cannot have
power or will as regards Himself; we cannot imagine such a thing. They
take these attributes as different relations between God and His
creatures, signifying that He has power in creating things, will in
giving to things existence as He desires, and wisdom in knowing what He
created. Consequently, these attributes do not refer to the essence of
God, but express relations between Him and His creatures.

Therefore we, who truly believe in the Unity of God, declare, that as
we do not believe that some element is included in His essence by which
He created the heavens, another by which He created the [four]
elements, a third by which He created the ideals, in the same way we
reject the idea that His essence contains an element by which He has
power, another element by which He has will, and a third by which He
has a knowledge of His creatures. On the contrary, He is a simple
essence, without any additional element whatever; He created the
universe, and knows it, but not by any extraneous force. There is no
difference whether these various attributes refer to His actions or to
relations between Him and His works; in fact, these relations, as we
have also shown, exist only in the thoughts of men. This is what we
must believe concerning the attributes occurring in the books of the
Prophets; some may also be taken as expressive of the perfection of God
by way of comparison with what we consider as perfections in us, as we
shall explain.






CHAPTER LIV


The wisest man, our Teacher Moses, asked two things of God, and
received a reply respecting both. The one thing he asked was, that God
should let him know His true essence; the other, which in fact he asked
first, that God should let him know His attributes. In answer to both
these petitions God promised that He would let him know all His
attributes, and that these were nothing but His actions. He also told
him that His true essence could not be perceived, and pointed out a
method by which he could obtain the utmost knowledge of God possible
for man to acquire. The knowledge obtained by Moses has not been
possessed by any human being before him or after him. His petition to
know the attributes of God is contained in the following words: “Show
me now thy way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in thy
sight” (Exod. xxxiii. 13). Consider how many excellent ideas found
expression in the words, “Show me thy way, that I may know thee.” We
learn from them that God is known by His attributes, for Moses believed
that he knew Him, when he was shown the way of God. The words “That I
may find grace in thy sight,” imply that he who knows God finds grace
in His eyes. Not only is he acceptable and welcome to God who fasts and
prays, but everyone who knows Him. He who has no knowledge of God is
the object of His wrath and displeasure. The pleasure and the
displeasure of God, the approach to Him and the withdrawal from Him are
proportional to the amount of man’s knowledge or ignorance concerning
the Creator. We have already gone too far away from our subject, let us
now return to it.

Moses prayed to God to grant him knowledge of His attributes, and also
pardon for His people; when the latter had been granted, he continued
to pray for the knowledge of God’s essence in the words, “Show me thy
glory” (ib. 18), and then received, respecting his first request, “Show
me thy way,” the following favourable reply, “I will make all my
goodness to pass before thee” (ib. 19); as regards the second request,
however, he was told, “Thou canst not see my face” (ib. 20). The words
“all my goodness” imply that God promised to show him the whole
creation, concerning which it has been stated, “And God saw everything
that he had made, and, behold, it was very good” (Gen. i. 31); when I
say “to show him the whole creation,” I mean to imply that God promised
to make him comprehend the nature of all things, their relation to each
other, and the way they are governed by God both in reference to the
universe as a whole and to each creature in particular. This knowledge
is referred to when we are told of Moses, “he is firmly established in
all mine house” (Num. xii. 7); that is, “his knowledge of all the
creatures in My universe is correct and firmly established”; for false
opinions are not firmly established. Consequently the knowledge of the
works of God is the knowledge of His attributes, by which He can be
known. The fact that God promised Moses to give him a knowledge of His
works, may be inferred from the circumstance that God taught him such
attributes as refer exclusively to His works, viz., “merciful and
gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness,” etc., (Exod. xxxiv.
6). It is therefore clear that the ways which Moses wished to know, and
which God taught him, are the actions emanating from God. Our Sages
call them middot (qualities), and speak of the thirteen middoth of God
(Talm. B. Rosh ha-shanah, p. 17b); they used the term also in reference
to man; comp. “there are four different middoth (characters) among
those who go to the house of learning”; “There are four different
middoth (characters) among those who give charity” (Mishnah Abot, v.
13, 14). They do not mean to say that God really possesses middot
(qualities), but that He performs actions similar to such of our
actions as originate in certain qualities, i.e., in certain psychical
dispositions; not that God has really such dispositions. Although Moses
was shown “all His goodness,” i.e., all His works, only the thirteen
middot are mentioned, because they include those acts of God which
refer to the creation and the government of mankind, and to know these
acts was the principal object of the prayer of Moses. This is shown by
the conclusion of his prayer, “that I may know thee, that I may find
grace in thy sight, and consider that this nation is thy people” (Exod.
xxxiii. 16), that is to say, the people whom I have to rule by certain
acts in the performance of which I must be guided by Thy own acts in
governing them. We have thus shown that “the ways” used in the Bible,
and “middot” used in the Mishnah, are identical, denoting the acts
emanating from God in reference to the universe.

Whenever any one of His actions is perceived by us, we ascribe to God
that emotion which is the source of the act when performed by
ourselves, and call Him by an epithet which is formed from the verb
expressing that emotion. We see, e.g., how well He provides for the
life of the embryo of living beings; how He endows with certain
faculties both the embryo itself and those who have to rear it after
its birth, in order that it may be protected from death and
destruction, guarded against all harm, and assisted in the performance
of all that is required [for its development]. Similar acts, when
performed by us, are due to a certain emotion and tenderness called
mercy and pity. God is, therefore, said to be merciful; e.g., “Like as
a father is merciful to his children, so the Lord is merciful to them
that fear Him” (Ps. ciii. 13); “And I will spare them, as a man spareth
(yaḥamol) his own son that serveth him” (Mal. iii. 17). Such instances
do not imply that God is influenced by a feeling of mercy, but that
acts similar to those which a father performs for his son, out of pity,
mercy and real affection, emanate from God solely for the benefit of
His pious men, and are by no means the result of any impression or
change—[produced in God].—When we give something to a person who has no
claim upon us, we perform an act of grace; e.g., “Grant them graciously
unto us” (Judges xxi. 22). [The same term is used in reference to God,
e.g.] “which God hath graciously given” (Gen. xxxiii. 5); “Because God
hath dealt graciously with me” (ib. 11). Instances of this kind are
numerous. God creates and guides beings who have no claim upon Him to
be created and guided by Him; He is therefore called gracious
(ḥannun).—His actions towards mankind also include great calamities,
which overtake individuals and bring death to them, or affect whole
families and even entire regions, spread death, destroy generation
after generation, and spare nothing whatsoever. Hence there occur
inundations, earthquakes, destructive storms, expeditions of one nation
against the other for the sake of destroying it with the sword and
blotting out its memory, and many other evils of the same kind.
Whenever such evils are caused by us to any person, they originate in
great anger, violent jealousy, or a desire for revenge. God is
therefore called, because of these acts, “jealous,” “revengeful,”
“wrathful,” and “keeping anger” (Nah. i. 2); that is to say, He
performs acts similar to those which, when performed by us, originate
in certain psychical dispositions, in jealousy, desire for retaliation,
revenge, or anger; they are in accordance with the guilt of those who
are to be punished, and not the result of any emotion; for He is above
all defect! The same is the case with all divine acts; though
resembling those acts which emanate from our passions and psychical
dispositions, they are not due to anything superadded to His
essence.—The governor of a country, if he is a prophet, should conform
to these attributes. Acts [of punishment] must be performed by him
moderately and in accordance with justice, not merely as an outlet of
his passion. He must not let loose his anger, nor allow his passion to
overcome him; for all passions are bad, and they must be guarded
against as far as it lies in man’s power. At times and towards some
persons he must be merciful and gracious, not only from motives of
mercy and compassion, but according to their merits; at other times and
towards other persons he must evince anger, revenge, and wrath in
proportion to their guilt, but not from motives of passion. He must be
able to condemn a person to death by fire without anger, passion, or
loathing against him, and must exclusively be guided by what he
perceives of the guilt of the person, and by a sense of the great
benefit which a large number will derive from such a sentence. You
have, no doubt, noticed in the Torah how the commandment to annihilate
the seven nations, and “to save alive nothing that breatheth” (Deut.
xx. 16) is followed immediately by the words, “That they teach you not
to do after all their abominations, which they have done unto their
gods; so should you sin against the Lord your God” (ib. 18); that is to
say, you shall not think that this commandment implies an act of
cruelty or of retaliation; it is an act demanded by the tendency of man
to remove everything that might turn him away from the right path, and
to clear away all obstacles in the road to perfection, that is, to the
knowledge of God. Nevertheless, acts of mercy, pardon, pity, and grace
should more frequently be performed by the governor of a country than
acts of punishment; seeing that all the thirteen middoth of God are
attributes of mercy with only one exception, namely, “visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children” (Exod. xxxiv. 7); for the
meaning of the preceding attribute (in the original ve-nakkeh lo
yenakkeh) is “and he will not utterly destroy”; (and not “He will by no
means clear the guilty”); comp. “And she will be utterly destroyed
(ve-nikketah), she shall sit upon the ground” (Isa. iii. 26). When it
is said that God is visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, this refers exclusively to the sin of idolatry, and to no
other sin. That this is the case may be inferred from what is said in
the ten commandments, “upon the third and fourth generation of my
enemies” (Exod. xx. 5), none except idolaters being called “enemy”;
comp. also “every abomination to the Lord, which he hateth” (Deut. xii.
31). It was, however, considered sufficient to extend the punishment to
the fourth generation, because the fourth generation is the utmost a
man can see of his posterity; and when, therefore, the idolaters of a
place are destroyed, the old man worshipping idols is killed, his son,
his grandson, and his great-grandson, that is, the fourth generation.
By the mention of this attribute we are, as it were, told that His
commandments, undoubtedly in harmony with His acts, include the death
even of the little children of idolaters because of the sin of their
fathers and grandfathers. This principle we find frequently applied in
the Law, as, e.g., we read concerning the city that has been led astray
to idolatry, “destroy it utterly, and all that is therein” (Deut. xiii.
15). All this has been ordained in order that every vestige of that
which would lead to great injury should be blotted out, as we have
explained.

We have gone too far away from the subject of this chapter, but we have
shown why it has been considered sufficient to mention only these
(thirteen) out of all His acts; namely, because they are required for
the good government of a country; for the chief aim of man should be to
make himself, as far as possible, similar to God: that is to say, to
make his acts similar to the acts of God, or as our Sages expressed it
in explaining the verse, “Ye shall be holy” (Lev. xxi. 2): “He is
gracious, so be you also gracious; He is merciful, so be you also
merciful.”

The principal object of this chapter was to show that all attributes
ascribed to God are attributes of His acts, and do not imply that God
has any qualities.






CHAPTER LV


We have already, on several occasions, shown in this treatise that
everything that implies corporeality or passiveness, is to be negatived
in reference to God, for all passiveness implies change; and the agent
producing that state is undoubtedly different from the object affected
by it; and if God could be affected in any way whatever, another being
beside Him would act on Him and cause change in Him. All kinds of
non-existence must likewise be negatived in reference to Him; no
perfection whatever can therefore be imagined to be at one time absent
from Him, and at another present in Him: for if this were the case, He
would [at a certain time] only be potentially perfect. Potentiality
always implies non-existence, and when anything has to pass from
potentiality into reality, another thing that exists in reality is
required to effect that transition. Hence it follows that all
perfections must really exist in God, and none of them must in any way
be a mere potentiality. Another thing likewise to be denied in
reference to God, is similarity to any existing being. This has been
generally accepted, and is also mentioned in the books of the Prophets;
e.g., “To whom, then, will you liken me?” (Isa. xl. 25); “To whom,
then, will you liken God?” (ib. 18); “There is none like unto Thee”
(Jer. x. 6). Instances of this kind are frequent. In short, it is
necessary to demonstrate by proof that nothing can be predicated of God
that implies any of the following four things: corporeality, emotion or
change, non-existence,—e.g., that something would be potential at one
time and real at another—and similarity with any of His creatures. In
this respect our knowledge of God is aided by the study of Natural
Science. For he who is ignorant of the latter cannot understand the
defect implied in emotions, the difference between potentiality and
reality, the non-existence implied in all potentiality, the inferiority
of a thing that exists in potentiâ to that which moves in order to
cause its transition from potentiality into reality, and the
inferiority of that which moves for this purpose compared with its
condition when the transition has been effected. He who knows these
things, but without their proofs, does not know the details which
logically result from these general propositions; and therefore he
cannot prove that God exists, or that the [four] things mentioned above
are inadmissible in reference to God.

Having premised these remarks, I shall explain in the next chapter the
error of those who believe that God has essential attributes; those who
have some knowledge of Logic and Natural Science will understand it.






CHAPTER LVI


Similarity is based on a certain relation between two things; if
between two things no relation can be found, there can be no similarity
between them, and there is no relation between two things that have no
similarity to each other; e.g., we do not say this heat is similar to
that colour, or this voice is similar to that sweetness. This is
self-evident. Since the existence of a relation between God and man, or
between Him and other beings has been denied, similarity must likewise
be denied. You must know that two things of the same kind—i.e., whose
essential properties are the same, and which are distinguished from
each other by greatness and smallness, strength and weakness, etc.—are
necessarily similar, though different in this one way; e.g., a grain of
mustard and the sphere of the fixed stars are similar as regards the
three dimensions, although the one is exceedingly great, the other
exceedingly small, the property of having [three] dimensions is the
same in both; or the heat of wax melted by the sun and the heat of the
element of fire, are similar as regards heat; although the heat is
exceedingly great in the one case, and exceedingly small in the other,
the existence of that quality (heat) is the same in both. Thus those
who believe in the presence of essential attributes in God, viz.,
Existence, Life, Power, Wisdom, and Will, should know that these
attributes, when applied to God, have not the same meaning as when
applied to us, and that the difference does not only consist in
magnitude, or in the degree of perfection, stability, and durability.
It cannot be said, as they practically believe, that His existence is
only more stable, His life more permanent, His power greater, His
wisdom more perfect, and His will more general than ours, and that the
same definition applies to both. This is in no way admissible, for the
expression “more than” is used in comparing two things as regards a
certain attribute predicated of both of them in exactly the same sense,
and consequently implies similarity [between God and His creatures].
When they ascribe to God essential attributes, these so-called
essential attributes should not have any similarity to the attributes
of other things, and should according to their own opinion not be
included in one of the same definition, just as there is no similarity
between the essence of God and that of other beings. They do not follow
this principle, for they hold that one definition may include them, and
that, nevertheless, there is no similarity between them. Those who are
familiar with the meaning of similarity will certainly understand that
the term existence, when applied to God and to other beings, is
perfectly homonymous. In like manner, the terms Wisdom, Power, Will,
and Life are applied to God and to other beings by way of perfect
homonymity, admitting of no comparison whatever. Nor must you think
that these attributes are employed as hybrid terms; for hybrid terms
are such as are applied to two things which have a similarity to each
other in respect to a certain property which is in both of them an
accident, not an essential, constituent element. The attributes of God,
however, are not considered as accidental by any intelligent person,
while all attributes applied to man are accidents, according to the
Mutakallemim. I am therefore at a loss to see how they can find any
similarity [between the attributes of God and those of man]; how their
definitions can be identical, and their significations the same! This
is a decisive proof that there is, in no way or sense, anything common
to the attributes predicated of God, and those used in reference to
ourselves; they have only the same names, and nothing else is common to
them. Such being the case, it is not proper to believe, on account of
the use of the same attributes, that there is in God something
additional to His essence, in the same way as attributes are joined to
our essence. This is most important for those who understand it. Keep
it in memory, and study it thoroughly, in order to be well prepared for
that which I am going to explain to you.






CHAPTER LVII


On attributes; remarks more recondite than the preceding. It is known
that existence is an accident appertaining to all things, and therefore
an element superadded to their essence. This must evidently be the case
as regards everything the existence of which is due to some cause; its
existence is an element superadded to its essence. But as regards a
being whose existence is not due to any cause—God alone is that being,
for His existence, as we have said, is absolute—existence and essence
are perfectly identical; He is not a substance to which existence is
joined as an accident, as an additional element. His existence is
always absolute, and has never been a new element or an accident in
Him. Consequently God exists without possessing the attribute of
existence. Similarly He lives, without possessing the attribute of
life; knows, without possessing the attribute of knowledge; is
omnipotent without possessing the attribute of omnipotence; is wise,
without possessing the attribute of wisdom; all this reduces itself to
one and the same entity; there is no plurality in Him, as will be
shown. It is further necessary to consider that unity and plurality are
accidents supervening to an object according as it consists of many
elements or of one. This is fully explained in the book called
Metaphysics. In the same way as number is not the substance of the
things numbered, so is unity not the substance of the thing which has
the attribute of unity, for unity and plurality are accidents belonging
to the category of discrete quantity, and supervening to such objects
as are capable of receiving them.

To that being, however, which has truly simple, absolute existence, and
in which composition is inconceivable, the accident of unity is as
inadmissible as the accident of plurality; that is to say, God’s unity
is not an element superadded, but He is One without possessing the
attribute of unity. The investigation of this subject, which is almost
too subtle for our understanding, must not be based on current
expressions employed in describing it, for these are the great source
of error. It would be extremely difficult for us to find, in any
language whatsoever, words adequate to this subject, and we can only
employ inadequate language. In our endeavour to show that God does not
include a plurality, we can only say “He is one,” although “one” and
“many” are both terms which serve to distinguish quantity. We therefore
make the subject clearer, and show to the understanding the way of
truth by saying He is one but does not possess the attribute of unity.

The same is the case when we say God is the First (Kadmon), to express
that He has not been created; the term “First” is decidedly inaccurate,
for it can in its true sense only be applied to a being that is subject
to the relation of time; the latter, however, is an accident to motion
which again is connected with a body. Besides the attribute “first” is
a relative term, being in regard to time the same as the terms “long”
and “short” are in regard to a line. Both expressions, “first” and
“created,” are equally inadmissible in reference to any being to which
the attribute of time is not applicable, just as we do not say
“crooked” or “straight” in reference to taste, “salted” or “insipid” in
reference to the voice. These subjects are not unknown to those who
have accustomed themselves to seek a true understanding of the things,
and to establish their properties in accordance with the abstract
notions which the mind has formed of them, and who are not misled by
the inaccuracy of the words employed. All attributes, such as “the
First,” “the Last,” occurring in the Scriptures in reference to God,
are as metaphorical as the expressions “ear” and “eye.” They simply
signify that God is not subject to any change or innovation whatever;
they do not imply that God can be described by time, or that there is
any comparison between Him and any other being as regards time, and
that He is called on that account “the first” and “the last.” In short,
all similar expressions are borrowed from the language commonly used
among the people. In the same way we use “One” in reference to God, to
express that there is nothing similar to Him, but we do not mean to say
that an attribute of unity is added to His essence.






CHAPTER LVIII


This chapter is even more recondite than the preceding. Know that the
negative attributes of God are the true attributes: they do not include
any incorrect notions or any deficiency whatever in reference to God,
while positive attributes imply polytheism, and are inadequate, as we
have already shown. It is now necessary to explain how negative
expressions can in a certain sense be employed as attributes, and how
they are distinguished from positive attributes. Then I shall show that
we cannot describe the Creator by any means except by negative
attributes. An attribute does not exclusively belong to the one object
to which it is related; while qualifying one thing, it can also be
employed to qualify other things, and is in that case not peculiar to
that one thing. E.g., if you see an object from a distance, and on
enquiring what it is, are told that it is a living being, you have
certainly learnt an attribute of the object seen, and although that
attribute does not exclusively belong to the object perceived, it
expresses that the object is not a plant or a mineral. Again, if a man
is in a certain house, and you know that something is in the house, but
not exactly what, you ask what is in that house, and you are told, not
a plant nor a mineral. You have thereby obtained some special knowledge
of the thing; you have learnt that it is a living being, although you
do not yet know what kind of a living being it is. The negative
attributes have this in common with the positive, that they necessarily
circumscribe the object to some extent, although such circumscription
consists only in the exclusion of what otherwise would not be excluded.
In the following point, however, the negative attributes are
distinguished from the positive. The positive attributes, although not
peculiar to one thing, describe a portion of what we desire to know,
either some part of its essence or some of its accidents; the negative
attributes, on the other hand, do not, as regards the essence of the
thing which we desire to know, in any way tell us what it is, except it
be indirectly, as has been shown in the instance given by us.

After this introduction, I would observe that,—as has already been
shown—God’s existence is absolute, that it includes no composition, as
will be proved, and that we comprehend only the fact that He exists,
not His essence. Consequently it is a false assumption to hold that He
has any positive attribute; for He does not possess existence in
addition to His essence; it therefore cannot be said that the one may
be described as an attribute [of the other]; much less has He [in
addition to His existence] a compound essence, consisting of two
constituent elements to which the attribute could refer; still less has
He accidents, which could be described by an attribute. Hence it is
clear that He has no positive attribute whatever. The negative
attributes, however, are those which are necessary to direct the mind
to the truths which we must believe concerning God; for, on the one
hand, they do not imply any plurality, and, on the other, they convey
to man the highest possible knowledge of God; e.g., it has been
established by proof that some being must exist besides those things
which can be perceived by the senses, or apprehended by the mind; when
we say of this being, that it exists, we mean that its non-existence is
impossible. We then perceive that such a being is not, for instance,
like the four elements, which are inanimate, and we therefore say that
it is living, expressing thereby that it is not dead. We call such a
being incorporeal, because we notice that it is unlike the heavens,
which are living, but material. Seeing that it is also different from
the intellect, which, though incorporeal and living, owes its existence
to some cause, we say it is the first, expressing thereby that its
existence is not due to any cause. We further notice, that the
existence, that is the essence, of this being is not limited to its own
existence; many existences emanate from it, and its influence is not
like that of the fire in producing heat, or that of the sun in sending
forth light, but consists in constantly giving them stability and order
by well-established rule, as we shall show: we say, on that account, it
has power, wisdom, and will, i.e., it is not feeble or ignorant, or
hasty, and does not abandon its creatures; when we say that it is not
feeble, we mean that its existence is capable of producing the
existence of many other things; by saying that it is not ignorant, we
mean “it perceives” or “it lives,”—for everything that perceives is
living—by saying “it is not hasty, and does not abandon its creatures,”
we mean that all these creatures preserve a certain order and
arrangement; they are not left to themselves; they are not produced
aimlessly, but whatever condition they receive from that being is given
with design and intention. We thus learn that there is no other being
like unto God, and we say that He is One, i.e., there are not more Gods
than one.

It has thus been shown that every attribute predicated of God either
denotes the quality of an action, or—when the attribute is intended to
convey some idea of the Divine Being itself, and not of His actions—the
negation of the opposite. Even these negative attributes must not be
formed and applied to God, except in the way in which, as you know,
sometimes an attribute is negatived in reference to a thing, although
that attribute can naturally never be applied to it in the same sense,
as, e.g., we say, “This wall does not see.” Those who read the present
work are aware that, notwithstanding all the efforts of the mind, we
can obtain no knowledge of the essence of the heavens—a revolving
substance which has been measured by us in spans and cubits, and
examined even as regards the proportions of the several spheres to each
other and respecting most of their motions—although we know that they
must consist of matter and form; but the matter not being the same as
sublunary matter, we can only describe the heavens in terms expressing
negative properties, but not in terms denoting positive qualities. Thus
we say that the heavens are not light, not heavy, not passive and
therefore not subject to impressions, and that they do not possess the
sensations of taste and smell; or we use similar negative attributes.
All this we do, because we do not know their substance. What, then, can
be the result of our efforts, when we try to obtain a knowledge of a
Being that is free from substance, that is most simple, whose existence
is absolute, and not due to any cause, to whose perfect essence nothing
can be superadded, and whose perfection consists, as we have shown, in
the absence of all defects. All we understand is the fact that He
exists, that He is a Being to whom none of His creatures is similar,
who has nothing in common with them, who does not include plurality,
who is never too feeble to produce other beings, and whose relation to
the universe is that of a steersman to a boat; and even this is not a
real relation, a real simile, but serves only to convey to us the idea
that God rules the universe; that is, that He gives it duration, and
preserves its necessary arrangement. This subject will be treated more
fully. Praised be He! In the contemplation of His essence, our
comprehension and knowledge prove insufficient; in the examination of
His works, how they necessarily result from His will, our knowledge
proves to be ignorance, and in the endeavour to extol Him in words, all
our efforts in speech are mere weakness and failure!






CHAPTER LIX


The following question might perhaps be asked: Since there is no
possibility of obtaining a knowledge of the true essence of God, and
since it has also been proved that the only thing that man can
apprehend of Him is the fact that He exists, and that all positive
attributes are inadmissible, as has been shown; what is the difference
among those who have obtained a knowledge of God? Must not the
knowledge obtained by our teacher Moses, and by Solomon, be the same as
that obtained by any one of the lowest class of philosophers, since
there can be no addition to this knowledge? But, on the other hand, it
is generally accepted among theologians and also among philosophers,
that there can be a great difference between two persons as regards the
knowledge of God obtained by them. Know that this is really the case,
that those who have obtained a knowledge of God differ greatly from
each other; for in the same way as by each additional attribute an
object is more specified, and is brought nearer to the true
apprehension of the observer, so by each additional negative attribute
you advance toward the knowledge of God, and you are nearer to it than
he who does not negative, in reference to God, those qualities which
you are convinced by proof must be negatived. There may thus be a man
who after having earnestly devoted many years to the pursuit of one
science, and to the true understanding of its principles, till he is
fully convinced of its truths, has obtained as the sole result of this
study the conviction that a certain quality must be negatived in
reference to God, and the capacity of demonstrating that it is
impossible to apply it to Him. Superficial thinkers will have no proof
for this, will doubtfully ask, Is that thing existing in the Creator,
or not? And those who are deprived of sight will positively ascribe it
to God, although it has been clearly shown that He does not possess it.
E.g., while I show that God is incorporeal, another doubts and is not
certain whether He is corporeal or incorporeal; others even positively
declare that He is corporeal, and appear before the Lord with that
belief. Now see how great the difference is between these three men;
the first is undoubtedly nearest to the Almighty; the second is remote,
and the third still more distant from Him. If there be a fourth person
who holds himself convinced by proof that emotions are impossible in
God, while the first who rejects the corporeality, is not convinced of
that impossibility, that fourth person is undoubtedly nearer the
knowledge of God than the first, and so on, so that a person who,
convinced by proof, negatives a number of things in reference to God,
which according to our belief may possibly be in Him or emanate from
Him, is undoubtedly a more perfect man than we are, and would surpass
us still more if we positively believed these things to be properties
of God. It will now be clear to you, that every time you establish by
proof the negation of a thing in reference to God, you become more
perfect, while with every additional positive assertion you follow your
imagination and recede from the true knowledge of God. Only by such
ways must we approach the knowledge of God, and by such researches and
studies as would show us the inapplicability of what is inadmissible as
regards the Creator, not by such methods as would prove the necessity
of ascribing to Him anything extraneous to His essence, or asserting
that He has a certain perfection, when we find it to be a perfection in
relation to us. The perfections are all to some extent acquired
properties, and a property which must be acquired does not exist in
everything capable of making such acquisition.

You must bear in mind, that by affirming anything of God, you are
removed from Him in two respects; first, whatever you affirm, is only a
perfection in relation to us; secondly, He does not possess anything
superadded to this essence; His essence includes all His perfections,
as we have shown. Since it is a well-known fact that even that
knowledge of God which is accessible to man cannot be attained except
by negations, and that negations do not convey a true idea of the being
to which they refer, all people, both of past and present generations,
declared that God cannot be the object of human comprehension, that
none but Himself comprehends what He is, and that our knowledge
consists in knowing that we are unable truly to comprehend Him. All
philosophers say, “He has overpowered us by His grace, and is invisible
to us through the intensity of His light,” like the sun which cannot be
perceived by eyes which are too weak to bear its rays. Much more has
been said on this topic, but it is useless to repeat it here. The idea
is best expressed in the book of Psalms, “Silence is praise to Thee”
(lxv. 2). It is a very expressive remark on this subject; for whatever
we utter with the intention of extolling and of praising Him, contains
something that cannot be applied to God, and includes derogatory
expressions; it is therefore more becoming to be silent, and to be
content with intellectual reflection, as has been recommended by men of
the highest culture, in the words “Commune with your own heart upon
your bed, and be still” (Ps. iv. 4). You must surely know the following
celebrated passage in the Talmud—would that all passages in the Talmud
were like that!—although it is known to you, I quote it literally, as I
wish to point out to you the ideas contained in it: “A certain person,
reading prayers in the presence of Rabbi Ḥaninah, said, ‘God, the
great, the valiant and the tremendous, the powerful, the strong, and
the mighty.’—The rabbi said to him, Have you finished all the praises
of your Master? The three epithets, ‘God, the great, the valiant and
the tremendous,’ we should not have applied to God, had Moses not
mentioned them in the Law, and had not the men of the Great Synagogue
come forward subsequently and established their use in the prayer; and
you say all this! Let this be illustrated by a parable. There was once
an earthly king, possessing millions of gold coin; he was praised for
owning millions of silver coin; was this not really dispraise to him?”
Thus far the opinion of the pious rabbi. Consider, first, how repulsive
and annoying the accumulation of all these positive attributes was to
him; next, how he showed that, if we had only to follow our reason, we
should never have composed these prayers, and we should not have
uttered any of them. It has, however, become necessary to address men
in words that should leave some idea in their minds, and, in accordance
with the saying of our Sages, “The Torah speaks in the language of
men,” the Creator has been described to us in terms of our own
perfections; but we should not on that account have uttered any other
than the three above-mentioned attributes, and we should not have used
them as names of God except when meeting with them in reading the Law.
Subsequently, the men of the Great Synagogue, who were prophets,
introduced these expressions also into the prayer, but we should not on
that account use [in our prayers] any other attributes of God. The
principal lesson to be derived from this passage is that there are two
reasons for our employing those phrases in our prayers: first, they
occur in the Pentateuch; secondly, the Prophets introduced them into
the prayer. Were it not for the first reason, we should never have
uttered them; and were it not for the second reason, we should not have
copied them from the Pentateuch to recite them in our prayers; how then
could we approve of the use of those numerous attributes! You also
learn from this that we ought not to mention and employ in our prayers
all the attributes we find applied to God in the books of the Prophets;
for he does not say, “Were it not that Moses, our Teacher, said them,
we should not have been able to use them”; but he adds another
condition—“and had not the men of the Great Synagogue come forward and
established their use in the prayer,” because only for that reason are
we allowed to use them in our prayers. We cannot approve of what those
foolish persons do who are extravagant in praise, fluent and prolix in
the prayers they compose, and in the hymns they make in the desire to
approach the Creator. They describe God in attributes which would be an
offence if applied to a human being; for those persons have no
knowledge of these great and important principles, which are not
accessible to the ordinary intelligence of man. Treating the Creator as
a familiar object, they describe Him and speak of Him in any
expressions they think proper; they eloquently continue to praise Him
in that manner, and believe that they can thereby influence Him and
produce an effect on Him. If they find some phrase suited to their
object in the words of the Prophets they are still more inclined to
consider that they are free to make use of such texts—which should at
least be explained—to employ them in their literal sense, to derive new
expressions from them, to form from them numerous variations, and to
found whole compositions on them. This license is frequently met with
in the compositions of the singers, preachers, and others who imagine
themselves to be able to compose a poem. Such authors write things
which partly are real heresy, partly contain such folly and absurdity
that they naturally cause those who hear them to laugh, but also to
feel grieved at the thought that such things can be uttered in
reference to God. Were it not that I pitied the authors for their
defects, and did not wish to injure them, I should have cited some
passages to show you their mistakes; besides, the fault of their
compositions is obvious to all intelligent persons. You must consider
it, and think thus: If slander and libel is a great sin, how much
greater is the sin of those who speak with looseness of tongue in
reference to God, and describe Him by attributes which are far below
Him; and I declare that they not only commit an ordinary sin, but
unconsciously at least incur the guilt of profanity and blasphemy. This
applies both to the multitude that listens to such prayers, and to the
foolish man that recites them. Men, however, who understand the fault
of such compositions, and, nevertheless, recite them, may be classed,
according to my opinion, among those to whom the following words are
applied: “And the children of Israel used words that were not right
against the Lord their God” (2 Kings xvii. 9); and “utter error against
the Lord” (Isa. xxxii. 6). If you are of those who regard the honour of
their Creator, do not listen in any way to them, much less utter what
they say, and still less compose such prayers, knowing how great is the
offence of one who hurls aspersions against the Supreme Being. There is
no necessity at all for you to use positive attributes of God with the
view of magnifying Him in your thoughts, or to go beyond the limits
which the men of the Great Synagogue have introduced in the prayers and
in the blessings, for this is sufficient for all purposes, and even
more than sufficient, as Rabbi Ḥaninah said. Other attributes, such as
occur in the books of the Prophets, may be uttered when we meet with
them in reading those books; but we must bear in mind what has already
been explained, that they are either attributes of God’s actions, or
expressions implying the negation of the opposite. This likewise should
not be divulged to the multitude; but a reflection of this kind is
fitted for the few only who believe that the glorification of God does
not consist in uttering that which is not to be uttered, but in
reflecting on that on which man should reflect.

We will now conclude our exposition of the wise words of R. Ḥaninah. He
does not employ any such simile as: “A king who possesses millions of
gold denarii, and is praised as having hundreds”; for this would imply
that God’s perfections, although more perfect than those ascribed to
man are still of the same kind; but this is not the case, as has been
proved. The excellence of the simile consists in the words: “who
possesses golden denarii, and is praised as having silver denarii”;
this implies that these attributes, though perfections as regards
ourselves, are not such as regards God; in reference to Him they would
all be defects, as is distinctly suggested in the remark, “Is this not
an offence to Him?”

I have already told you that all these attributes, whatever perfection
they may denote according to your idea, imply defects in reference to
God, if applied to Him in the same sense as they are used in reference
to ourselves. Solomon has already given us sufficient instruction on
this subject by saying, “For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth;
therefore let thy words be few” (Eccles. v. 2).






CHAPTER LX


I will give you in this chapter some illustrations, in order that you
may better understand the propriety of forming as many negative
attributes as possible, and the impropriety of ascribing to God any
positive attributes. A person may know for certain that a “ship” is in
existence, but he may not know to what object that name is applied,
whether to a substance or to an accident; a second person then learns
that the ship is not an accident; a third, that it is not a mineral; a
fourth, that it is not a plant growing in the earth; a fifth, that it
is not a body whose parts are joined together by nature; a sixth, that
it is not a flat object like boards or doors; a seventh, that it is not
a sphere; an eighth, that it is not pointed; a ninth, that it is not
round-shaped; nor equilateral; a tenth, that it is not solid. It is
clear that this tenth person has almost arrived at the correct notion
of a “ship” by the foregoing negative attributes, as if he had exactly
the same notion as those have who imagine it to be a wooden substance
which is hollow, long, and composed of many pieces of wood, that is to
say, who know it by positive attributes. Of the other persons in our
illustration, each one is more remote from the correct notion of a ship
than the next mentioned, so that the first knows nothing about it but
the name. In the same manner you will come nearer to the knowledge and
comprehension of God by the negative attributes. But you must be
careful, in what you negative, to negative by proof, not by mere words,
for each time you ascertain by proof that a certain thing, believed to
exist in the Creator, must be negatived, you have undoubtedly come one
step nearer to the knowledge of God.

It is in this sense that some men come very near to God, and others
remain exceedingly remote from Him, not in the sense of those who are
deprived of vision, and believe that God occupies a place, which man
can physically approach or from which he can recede. Examine this well,
know it, and be content with it. The way which will bring you nearer to
God has been clearly shown to you; walk in it, if you have the desire.
On the other hand, there is a great danger in applying positive
attributes to God. For it has been shown that every perfection we could
imagine, even if existing in God in accordance with the opinion of
those who assert the existence of attributes, would in reality not be
of the same kind as that imagined by us, but would only be called by
the same name, according to our explanation; it would in fact amount to
a negation. Suppose, e.g., you say He has knowledge, and that
knowledge, which admits of no change and of no plurality, embraces many
changeable things; His knowledge remains unaltered, while new things
are constantly formed, and His knowledge of a thing before it exists,
while it exists, and when it has ceased to exist, is the same without
the least change: you would thereby declare that His knowledge is not
like ours; and similarly that His existence is not like ours. You thus
necessarily arrive at some negation, without obtaining a true
conception of an essential attribute; on the contrary, you are led to
assume that there is a plurality in God, and to believe that He, though
one essence, has several unknown attributes. For if you intend to
affirm them, you cannot compare them with those attributes known by us,
and they are consequently not of the same kind. You are, as it were,
brought by the belief in the reality of the attributes, to say that God
is one subject of which several things are predicated; though the
subject is not like ordinary subjects, and the predicates are not like
ordinary predicates. This belief would ultimately lead us to associate
other things with God, and not to believe that He is One. For of every
subject certain things can undoubtedly be predicated, and although in
reality subject and predicate are combined in one thing, by the actual
definition they consist of two elements, the notion contained in the
subject not being the same as that contained in the predicate. In the
course of this treatise it will be proved to you that God cannot be a
compound, and that He is simple in the strictest sense of the word.

I do not merely declare that he who affirms attributes of God has not
sufficient knowledge concerning the Creator, admits some association
with God, or conceives Him to be different from what He is; but I say
that he unconsciously loses his belief in God. For he whose knowledge
concerning a thing is insufficient, understands one part of it while he
is ignorant of the other, as, e.g., a person who knows that man
possesses life, but does not know that man possesses understanding; but
in reference to God, in whose real existence there is no plurality, it
is impossible that one thing should be known, and another unknown.
Similarly he who associates an object with [the properties of] another
object, conceives a true and correct notion of the one object, and
applies that notion also to the other; while those who admit the
attributes of God, do not consider them as identical with His essence,
but as extraneous elements. Again, he who conceives an incorrect notion
of an object, must necessarily have a correct idea of the object to
some extent; he, however, who says that taste belongs to the category
of quantity has not, according to my opinion, an incorrect notion of
taste, but is entirely ignorant of its nature, for he does not know to
what object the term “taste” is to be applied.—This is a very difficult
subject; consider it well.

According to this explanation you will understand, that those who do
not recognize, in reference to God, the negation of things, which
others negative by clear proof, are deficient in the knowledge of God,
and are remote from comprehending Him. Consequently, the smaller the
number of things is which a person can negative in relation to God, the
less he knows of Him, as has been explained in the beginning of this
chapter; but the man who affirms an attribute of God, knows nothing but
the same; for the object to which, in his imagination, he applies that
name, does not exist; it is a mere fiction and invention, as if he
applied that name to a non-existing being, for there is, in reality, no
such object. E.g., some one has heard of the elephant, and knows that
it is an animal, and wishes to know its form and nature. A person, who
is either misled or misleading, tells him it is an animal with one leg,
three wings, lives in the depth of the sea, has a transparent body; its
face is wide like that of a man, has the same form and shape, speaks
like a man, flies sometimes in the air, and sometimes swims like a
fish. I should not say, that he described the elephant incorrectly, or
that he has an insufficient knowledge of the elephant, but I would say
that the thing thus described is an invention and fiction, and that in
reality there exists nothing like it; it is a non-existing being,
called by the name of a really existing being, and like the griffin,
the centaur, and similar imaginary combinations for which simple and
compound names have been borrowed from real things. The present case is
analogous; namely, God, praised be His name, exists, and His existence
has been proved to be absolute and perfectly simple, as I shall
explain. If such a simple, absolutely existing essence were said to
have attributes, as has been contended, and were combined with
extraneous elements, it would in no way be an existing thing, as has
been proved by us; and when we say that that essence, which is called
“God,” is a substance with many properties by which it can be
described, we apply that name to an object which does not at all exist.
Consider, therefore, what are the consequences of affirming attributes
to God! As to those attributes of God which occur in the Pentateuch, or
in the books of the Prophets, we must assume that they are exclusively
employed, as has been stated by us, to convey to us some notion of the
perfections of the Creator, or to express qualities of actions
emanating from Him.






CHAPTER LXI


It is well known that all the names of God occurring in Scripture are
derived from His actions, except one, namely, the Tetragrammaton, which
consists of the letters yod, hé, vau and hé. This name is applied
exclusively to God, and is on that account called Shem ha-meforash,
“The nomen proprium.” It is the distinct and exclusive designation of
the Divine Being; whilst His other names are common nouns, and are
derived from actions, to which some of our own are similar, as we have
already explained. Even the name Adonay, “Lord,” which has been
substituted for the Tetragrammaton, is derived from the appellative
“lord”; comp. “The man who is the lord (adone) of the land spake
roughly to us” (Gen. xliii. 30). The difference between Adoni, “my
lord,” (with ḥirek under the nun), or Adonay (with kameẓ) is similar to
the difference between Sari, “my prince,” and Saraï, Abraham’s wife
(ib. xvi. 1), the latter form denoting majesty and distinction. An
angel is also addressed as “Adonay”; e.g., “Adonay (My lord), pass not
away, I pray thee” (ib. xviii. 3). I have restricted my explanation to
the term Adonay, the substitute for the Tetragrammaton, because it is
more commonly applied to God than any of the other names which are in
frequent use, like dayyan, “judge,” shadday, “almighty,” ẓaddik,
“righteous,” ḥannun, “gracious,” raḥum “merciful,” and elohim “chief”;
all these terms are unquestionably appellations and derivatives. The
derivation of the name, consisting of yod, hé, vau, and hé, is not
positively known, the word having no additional signification. This
sacred name, which, as you know, was not pronounced except in the
sanctuary by the appointed priests, when they gave the sacerdotal
blessing, and by the high priest on the Day of Atonement, undoubtedly
denotes something which is peculiar to God, and is not found in any
other being. It is possible that in the Hebrew language, of which we
have now but a slight knowledge, the Tetragrammaton, in the way it was
pronounced, conveyed the meaning of “absolute existence.” In short, the
majesty of the name and the great dread of uttering it, are connected
with the fact that it denotes God Himself, without including in its
meaning any names of the things created by Him. Thus our Sages say:
“‘My name’ (Num. vi. 27) means the name which is peculiar to Me.” All
other names of God have reference to qualities, and do not signify a
simple substance, but a substance with attributes, they being
derivatives. On that account it is believed that they imply the
presence of a plurality in God, I mean to say, the presence of
attributes, that is, of some extraneous element superadded to His
essence. Such is the meaning of all derivative names; they imply the
presence of some attribute and its substratum, though this be not
distinctly named. As, however, it has been proved, that God is not a
substratum capable of attributes, we are convinced that those
appellatives when employed as names of God, only indicate the relation
of certain actions to Him, or they convey to us some notion of His
perfection.

Hence R. Ḥaninah would have objected to the expression “the great, the
mighty, and the tremendous,” had it not been for the two reasons
mentioned by him; because such expressions lead men to think that the
attributes are essential, i.e., they are perfections actually present
in God. The frequent use of names of God derived from actions, led to
the belief that He had as many [essential] attributes as there were
actions from which the names were derived. The following promise was
therefore made, implying that mankind will at a certain future time
understand this subject, and be free from the error it involves: “In
that day will the Lord be One, and His name One” (Zech. xiv. 9). The
meaning of this prophecy is this: He being One, will then be called by
one name, which will indicate the essence of God; but it does not mean
that His sole name will be a derivative [viz., “One”]. In the Pirke
Rabbi Eliezer (chap. iii.) occurs the following passage: “Before the
universe was created, there was only the Almighty and His name.”
Observe how clearly the author states that all these appellatives
employed as names of God came into existence after the Creation. This
is true; for they all refer to actions manifested in the Universe. If,
however, you consider His essence as separate and as abstracted from
all actions, you will not describe it by an appellative, but by a
proper noun, which exclusively indicates that essence. Every other name
of God is a derivative, only the Tetragrammaton is a real nomen
proprium, and must not be considered from any other point of view. You
must beware of sharing the error of those who write amulets (kameot).
Whatever you hear from them, or read in their works, especially in
reference to the names which they form by combination, is utterly
senseless; they call these combinations shemot (names) and believe that
their pronunciation demands sanctification and purification, and that
by using them they are enabled to work miracles. Rational persons ought
not to listen to such men, nor in any way believe their assertions. No
other name is called shem ha-meforash except this Tetragrammaton, which
is written, but is not pronounced according to its letters. The words,
“Thus shall ye bless the children of Israel” (Num. vi. 23) are
interpreted in Siphri as follows: “‘Thus,’ in the holy language; again
‘thus,’ with the Shem ha-meforash.” The following remark is also found
there: “In the sanctuary [the name of God is pronounced] as it is
spelt, but elsewhere by its substitutes.” In the Talmud, the following
passage occurs: “‘Thus,’ i.e., with the shem ha-meforash.—You say [that
the priests, when blessing the people, had to pronounce] the shem
ha-meforash; this was perhaps not the case, and they may have used
other names instead.—We infer it from the words: ‘And they shall put My
name’ (Num. vi. 27), i.e., My name, which is peculiar to Me.” It has
thus been shown that the shem ha-meforash (the proper name of God) is
the Tetragrammaton, and that this is the only name which indicates
nothing but His essence, and therefore our Sages in referring to this
sacred term said “‘My name’ means the one which is peculiar to Me
alone.”

In the next chapter I will explain the circumstances which brought men
to a belief in the power of Shemot (names of God); I will point out the
main subject of discussion, and lay open to you its mystery, and then
not any doubt will be left in your mind, unless you prefer to be
misguided.

