Malala Yousafzai, "Diary of a Pakistani Schoolgirl" (BBC Urdu, 2009)

Malala Yousafzai (b. 1997) was an 11-year-old girl from the Swat Valley of Pakistan when
she began writing a diary for BBC Urdu under the pseudonym "Gul Makai" (Cornflower, from a
Pashtun folk tale). The Taliban had banned girls from attending school, and Malala dictated
her diary entries by phone to BBC journalist Abdul Hai Kakar. The entries ran from
January 3 to March 12, 2009. On October 9, 2012, a Taliban gunman shot Malala in the
head on her school bus. She survived and went on to become the youngest Nobel Peace Prize
laureate in 2014.

Sources:
- BBC Urdu original blog (2009)
- Globe and Mail compilation: https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/in-her-words-malala-yousafzais-chronicle-of-life-under-the-taliban/article4600066/
- Exploros educational resource: https://www.exploros.com/summary/Moving-moments-from-Malalas-BBC-diary

---

DIARY OF A PAKISTANI SCHOOLGIRL
by Gul Makai (Malala Yousafzai)
BBC Urdu, January-March 2009


Saturday 3 January

I had a terrible dream yesterday with military helicopters and the Taliban. I was afraid of going to school because the Taliban had issued an order banning all girls from attending. On my way from school to home I heard a man saying, "I will kill you". I walked faster, and after a while I checked behind me. But to my relief the man was talking on his mobile.


Thursday 15 January

Tomorrow the Taliban's order comes into effect, and my friend was discussing homework as if nothing out of the ordinary had happened.


Friday 16 January [Note: This was the deadline for the Taliban's ban on girls' education]

Today is the last day of our school. The school announced that we were closing. I was the only girl from my class that went to school today. They said this was the deadline and our school would not open again unless the Taliban changed their minds.


Sunday 18 January

My father and the prime minister said that the government would protect our schools. I was quite happy initially, but this will not solve our problem. So many soldiers have been killed and kidnapped, but the police are nowhere to be seen.


Thursday 22 January

Some of my friends have left because the situation here is dangerous. I do not leave home. At night, the Taleban ruler warns females not to leave home. He also warned that they would blow up schools.


Saturday 25 January

The army only considers protecting schools after dozens have been destroyed and hundreds of others closed down.


Wednesday 28 January

We are staying with a friend in Islamabad. It is my first visit to the city. It is beautiful with nice bungalows and wide roads, but it lacks natural beauty.


Saturday 7 February

I saw people with long hair and beards who looked like Taleban. Some houses are damaged from shelling.


Sunday 8 February

Looking at my uniform, school bag and geometry box makes me sad. Boys' schools are opening tomorrow, but the Taliban have banned girls' education.


Tuesday 19 February

I told my brothers that we will not talk of war but peace from now on. Our school headmistress said that examinations will be held in the first week of March. I will study harder.


[Note: The full diary comprised approximately 35 entries over 10 weeks. The BBC Urdu
originals were published in Urdu, with English translations appearing on BBC's website.
Only selected entries survive in publicly available English translation. The complete diary
is included in Malala's book "I Am Malala" (2013). The entries above are those that have
been most widely republished in English translation from BBC and press sources.]
