Selected Tweets and Posts from the Arab Spring (2011)

The Arab Spring was a series of anti-government protests, uprisings, and armed rebellions
that spread across much of the Arab world in the early 2010s. It began in Tunisia in
December 2010, when street vendor Mohamed Bouazizi set himself on fire in Sidi Bouzid
to protest his treatment by local officials. The movement spread to Egypt, Libya, Syria,
Yemen, Bahrain, and beyond. Social media -- particularly Twitter and Facebook -- played an
unprecedented role in organizing protests, documenting events, and spreading information
past state censorship.

Sources:
- Democracy Now! transcript of Asmaa Mahfouz video: https://www.democracynow.org/2011/2/8/asmaa_mahfouz_the_youtube_video_that
- Al Jazeera "The Arab Spring Retweeted": https://interactive.aljazeera.com/aje/2021/the-arab-spring-retweeted-10-years/index.html
- Various press accounts and archives

---

I. TUNISIA: THE SPARK (December 2010 - January 2011)

On December 17, 2010, Mohamed Bouazizi, a 26-year-old street vendor in the town of Sidi
Bouzid, set himself on fire outside a government building after police confiscated his
vegetable cart and a municipal official reportedly slapped him. His cousin Ali Bouazizi
recorded the aftermath and uploaded it to Facebook, sending it to Al Jazeera. The hashtag
#SidiBouzid became the index of the Tunisian revolution on Twitter.

On January 14, 2011, President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali fled Tunisia after 23 years in power.

@TeaCupThrills (Tunis, Saturday January 15, 2011):
"DUDE WHO ONCE TORTURED MY FATHER HAS BEEN ARRESTED #SIDIBOUZID"

@ClassicDiva:
"MABROOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOK" [Congratulations!]

@weddady (Mauritanian activist, January 13, 2011):
"I have been an activist for 20 years of my life. What is happening in #Tunisia is
unprecedented in Arab World #sidibouzid"


II. EGYPT: TAHRIR SQUARE (January-February 2011)

A. The "We Are All Khaled Said" Facebook Page

In June 2010, Wael Ghonim, an Egyptian Google executive, anonymously created the Facebook
page "We Are All Khaled Said" (Arabic: Kullena Khaled Said) to publicize the death of a
28-year-old Egyptian man beaten to death by police in Alexandria. The page drew over
473,000 followers by January 2011 and became the primary organizing platform for the
January 25 revolution.

Wael Ghonim, Facebook post (January 14, 2011):
"Today is the 14th... January 25 is Police Day and it's a national holiday... If 100,000
take to the streets, no one can stop us... I wonder if we can?"


B. Asmaa Mahfouz's YouTube Video (January 18, 2011)

Asmaa Mahfouz, a 26-year-old Egyptian activist and co-founder of the April 6 Youth
Movement, posted a video to Facebook on January 18, 2011 calling on Egyptians to
protest in Tahrir Square on January 25. The video went viral and is widely credited with
helping to spark the uprising.

[Translated transcript from the January 18, 2011 video:]

"Four Egyptians have set themselves on fire to protest humiliation and hunger and poverty
and degradation they had to live with for 30 years. Four Egyptians have set themselves on
fire thinking maybe we can have a revolution like Tunisia, maybe we can have freedom,
justice, honor and human dignity. Today, one of these four has died, and I saw people
commenting and saying, 'May God forgive him. He committed a sin and killed himself for
nothing.'

People, have some shame.

I posted that I, a girl, am going down to Tahrir Square, and I will stand alone. And I'll
hold up a banner. Perhaps people will show some honor. I even wrote my number so maybe
people will come down with me. No one came except three guys -- three guys and three
armored cars of riot police. And tens of hired thugs and officers came to terrorize us.
They shoved us roughly away from the people. But as soon as we were alone with them, they
started to talk to us. They said, 'Enough! These guys who burned themselves were
psychopaths.' Of course, on all national media, whoever dies in protest is a psychopath.
If they were psychopaths, why did they burn themselves at the parliament building?

I'm making this video to give you one simple message: we want to go down to Tahrir Square
on January 25th. If we still have honor and want to live in dignity on this land, we have
to go down on January 25th. We'll go down and demand our rights, our fundamental human
rights.

[...]

I won't even talk about any political rights. We just want our human rights and nothing
else. This entire government is corrupt -- a corrupt president and a corrupt security
force. These self-immolaters were not afraid of death but were afraid of security forces.
Can you imagine that? Are you going to kill yourselves, too, or are you completely
clueless? I'm going down on January 25th, and from now 'til then I'm going to distribute
fliers in the streets. I will not set myself on fire. If the security forces want to set me
on fire, let them come and do it.

If you think yourself a man, come with me on January 25th. Whoever says women shouldn't
go to protests because they will get beaten, let him have some honor and manhood and come
with me on January 25th. Whoever says it is not worth it because there will only be a
handful of people, I want to tell him, 'You are the reason behind this, and you are a
traitor, just like the president or any security cop who beats us in the streets.' Your
presence with us will make a difference, a big difference. Talk to your neighbors, your
colleagues, friends and family, and tell them to come. They don't have to come to Tahrir
Square. Just go down anywhere and say it, that we are free human beings. Sitting at home
and just following us on news or Facebook leads to our humiliation, leads to my own
humiliation. If you have honor and dignity as a man, come. Come and protect me and other
girls in the protest. If you stay at home, then you deserve all that is being done, and you
will be guilty before your nation and your people. And you'll be responsible for what
happens to us on the streets while you sit at home.

Go down to the street. Send SMSes. Post it on the net. Make people aware. You know your
own social circle, your building, your family, your friends. Tell them to come with us.
Bring five people or 10 people. If each one of us manages to bring five or 10 to Tahrir
Square and talk to people and tell them, 'This is enough. Instead of setting ourselves on
fire, let us do something positive,' it will make a difference, a big difference.

Never say there's no hope. Hope disappears only when you say there's none. So long as you
come down with us, there will be hope. Don't be afraid of the government. Fear none but
God. God says He will not change the condition of a people until they change what is in
themselves. Don't think you can be safe anymore. None of us are. Come down with us and
demand your rights, my rights, your family's rights. I am going down on January 25th, and
I will say no to corruption, no to this regime."


C. Asmaa Mahfouz, eve of January 25 (January 24, 2011):

"It's now 10:30 p.m. on January 24th, 2011. Tomorrow is the 25th, the day we've been
waiting for, the day we all worked so hard for. The most beautiful thing about it is that
those who worked on this were not politicians at all. It was all of us, all Egyptians. We
worked hard. Children no older than 14, they printed the poster and started distributing it
after prayers. Old people in their sixties and seventies helped, as well. People distributed
it everywhere they could -- in taxis, at the metro, in the street, in schools, universities,
companies, government agencies. All of Egypt awaits tomorrow.

I know we are all nervous right now and anxious, but we all want to see tomorrow's event
happen and succeed. I'd like to tell everyone that tomorrow is not the revolution and is not
the day we'll change it all. No, tomorrow is the beginning of the end. Tomorrow, if we make
our stand despite all the security may do to us and stand as one in peaceful protest, it
will be the first real step on the road to change, the first real step that will take us
forward and teach us a lot of things. Our solidarity in planning is a success in itself. To
simply know that we must demand our rights, that is success."


D. Asmaa Mahfouz, after January 25 (January 25, 2011):

"The people want to bring down the regime. This is what we were all chanting yesterday,
January 25th, 2011. Thousands upon thousands -- I could not count how many there were.
Demonstrations from all sides. Riot police could not control the sheer numbers.

What we learned yesterday is that power belongs to the people, not to the thugs. Power is
in unity, not in division. Yesterday, we truly lived the best moments of our lives. We
learned that the Egyptian people are not chaotic or disorderly. The government keeps saying
that we are a chaotic people and a revolution will lead to chaos. Yesterday, we were truly
one hand, concerned for one another. Yesterday, not even one girl was harassed, even among
those thousands. No one stole anything. No one struck anyone. No fights broke out. We were
defending each other. Everyone was concerned for one another. Some bought water bottles and
distributed them; others distributed sandwiches. We all said it was from our hearts. Long
live Egypt! Some boys and girls even cleaned the streets of trash and garbage. This is the
Egyptian people that we have always dreamed of. I can now say that I am proud to be
Egyptian. I truly wish to kiss every Egyptian's forehead and say, 'Thank you for being
Egyptian.' I never imagined that I would see this.

But we must continue. The riot police was after us until 5:00 a.m., chasing us to beat and
arrest us. Yesterday, we saw them scared. Live ammunition and rubber bullets and tear gas
and water cannons to break us up. But we did not break up, and we're still united."


E. Selected Al Jazeera tweets from the Egyptian revolution:

@AJEnglish (January 25, 2011):
"Egyptian protesters take to streets: Unprecedented protests in Cairo..."

@AJEnglish (January 28, 2011):
"BREAKING NEWS - Mubarak: I have ordered the government to step down..."

@AJEnglish (January 29, 2011):
"Estimates say over 50,000 #Egyptians are currently in Tahrir Square..."

@AJEnglish (January 30, 2011):
"#Egypt state TV reporting #AlJazeera office in #Cairo is to be shut down..."

On February 11, 2011, after 18 days of protests, President Hosni Mubarak resigned.


III. THE WIDER ARAB SPRING

The movements spread across the region: to Libya, where Gaddafi was overthrown; to Yemen,
Bahrain, and Syria; and to protests in Morocco, Jordan, Algeria, and elsewhere.

The common refrain across countries, chanted by millions, was:

"Ash-shaʻb yurīd isqāṭ an-niẓām"
("The people want to bring down the regime")


[Note: Many original tweets from the Arab Spring are no longer accessible due to account
deletions, Twitter API changes, and the passage of time. The texts above are drawn from
journalistic accounts, transcripts, and archival projects. The Al Jazeera archive contains
approximately 9,825 tweets from this period. Academic datasets of tweet IDs exist but full
text cannot be redistributed under Twitter's terms of service.]
